+++
title = "13 Daily Observances"

+++
Daily Observances of Orthodox Sri Vaishnava Brahmans.

Every Sri Vaishnava Brahman should bear in mind that the end and aim of a man's life is to attain moksha. During one's life one must devote most of one's time to the service of God. Every moment one should be thinking of his entire dependence on God.

This dependence of a human being on God and God's condescension on the human being are referred to by the use of the terms "Sesha and Seshi" bhāvams. To be able to worship God one should be pure in body and in mind. This can be attained only by the performance of certain rites. To get purified the daily rites such as sandhyavandanam. snanam, etc., ought to be performed regularly by one.

A day is usually divided into five periods by an orthodox person and during each period the rites fixed for that period are carried out. Full details are given in "Pancha kāla prakāśikā " and "Ahnikams" published by various people. But of all these the [[०५४]]

[[४९]]
one called "Nityam" written by Ramanuja is the oldest. Most of the details about the observances are taken from Nityam. The following account is based entirely upon Nityam of Śrī Bhashyakara, edited by Śrīman Mahamahopadhyaya Setlur Narasimhacharyaswami now living at Purasawakam, Madras.

A day is usually divided into the five following divisions for the performance of the various rites. They are -१. Abhigamanam, २. Upādānam, ३ Ijyai, ४. Svādhyayam and ५. Yogam.

The abhigamanam period of the day is intended for bathing and for performance of the sandhyavandanam. A prayer to God to enable the person to carry out the duties during this period successfully is also included. The next period of time is called the Upādānakālam and it is one in which the materials for the worship of God is secured.

The securing of the materials such as flowers, sandal paste, the securing of peace of mind and goodness of mind by means of Kalakshēpams (spending the time by reading or hearing others about God) are also included under this heading. Ijyai is the period of the day devoted to the mādhyāhnikam and the Bhagavadārādhanam (worshipping God).

The next period is Svādhyāya during which period Vedas, Itihasapurānas, prabandhams and dwaya mantras are read and understood, with a view to increase the knowledge of God and His bhakti (or devotion) daily. Then sayamabhigamana or sandhyavandana for the evening and prayer to God are performed Yoga, the last item of the daily performance, is the thought of God's good actions and his glories until he gets sleep.

When he goes to sleep he is expected to imagine that his head is lying at the feet of his Lord.

## GETTING UP FROM SLEEP.

The first thing that one does every day during the early part of the day is the getting up from his bed. He is expected, under ordinary circumstances, to wake up at least half an hour before sunrise and then he is to pronounce the name of God as Hari! Hari! at least six times. Then the person is expected to repeat the ślokas describing the coming of God as Hari and destroying the distress of Gajendra, the chief of the elephants.

God is expected to remove all the sins and since he came out as Hari and destroyed the sorrows of Gajendra, this fact is clearly pointed out in the ślokas repeated. If the person getting up from his bed is strong enough and capable of commanding his time he may repeat the dhyāna ślokas of the १०८ tirupathis, the daśāvatāra stotras, the larger gadya, other stotras of God loudly and in a manner pleasant to be heard by others.

Then sitting in the same bed he thinks of the days that have passed without doing him any good and feels sorry for his not obtaining the moksha so much expected by him.

If the man is one who has not gone through the prapatti ceremony, he should feel for his present position of being an akīnchana, a sinner incapable of getting rid of his sins. Seeing his inability to get rid of his sins and realising his low and incapable position, he feels very sorry. In the case of a prapanna, he should feel for his bondage, but as he is sure of his salvation having surrendered himself to God, he should feel ४
[[०५५]]
[[५०]]

glad of it. Though he may feel dissatisfaction of not having attained moksha he should not be over-powered by that feeling so as to prevent him from attending to his other legitimate duties such as doing service to God. So he must think of his future duties to God as stated in the pasuram "Gatattirku sōkiyādē varugira nirukku aṇaikōlum kaṇakkile". This means "not feeling much for what is past, preparing for the future by proper means." He must spend his time by worshipping God. "Tarittezudi vāsittum kēţţum vanangi vazipattum pūjittum pōkkinen pōdu." When translated this means "I spent my time by writing, reading, hearing, praying and worshipping God." The person then does 'Śrotrachamana' touching his right ear with his right hand and repeats the mantra for 'satvikatyaga', and is believed to become a dependent of God and so prays to Him that his kainkaryas (works to God) may be properly done and then he repeats some stotras (praises) of God well and loudly. If time permits he may repeat portions of his Vedas, such as tiruvais of the same.

"
On getting from his bed he is to repeat the mantra Om namah kshitidharaya".

This means "Oh I pray to you the supporter of this earth." He then prays to Varahamūrti who is supporting the world. He then places his right foot on the floor repeating a prayer to Bhadevi. He then prays to Trivikrama thus:-"Vishnōhkramosi" and walks on.

## EVACUATION OF THE URINE AND THE FAECES.

Taking the materials necessary for his bath such as fresh clothes, darbha, rice and sesamum and holding in his hand a bamboo stick and repeating "Śrī Kēśavāya namah" (I am praying to Kēśava the name of God) he leaves his house. After going a certain distance, he places the materials he takes with him in a place which is clean and determined by him. The place he chooses for taking mud must be one in which no worms are found, not ploughed by a plough, not found mixed with fine 'alar' (soft mud), not mixed up with unholy things, not mingled with soil used by others and free from ant-hills. From such a place he takes enough mud and places this mud close to the place where he is to wash himself. Leaving his sandals he is to slap his palms thrice and then wrap round his head his upper or other cloth. He next winds round his right-ear his sacred thread so that it may not be dangling. His face and mouth are covered with his upper cloth, and then he sits for defaecation. Before sitting for this he should strew the ground with leaves that are dried and those not useful for sacrificial purposes. If the time is twilight or morning he should sit facing north and if the time is night he is expected to sit facing south. While sitting for this he should not speak with any person. He is not expected to sit for defæcation and be seeing temples, rivers, cows, brahmans, fire, sun, moon, air and Ficus religiosa tree. For this purpose he should avoid using the places such as the following:-"Flower garden, groves, tulsi gardens, crops, smaśānam (burning ground), alkaline land, hill, ant-hill, pits, unclean spot, sand, shade, ways and paths, water, ploughed land, cowsheds, foot of trees, darbha grown spot, rivers, tanks, sea shore, places where cow dung is stored, yajñabhūmi (place where yajña is performed), [[०५६]]

[[५१]]
grassy-plot, spaces in front of dwelling houses, crevices of rocks or stones and places where insects abound. He should not see the leavings During defæcation he is not to use wet clothes. During the time he sits for this process he is not to spit. As a matter of fact spitting is prohibited during the process of defæcation.

## WASHING (ŚAUCHAM).

After defaecation he goes to a place where he has to wash himself taking the mud already secured in his right hand. He divides this mud into four parts and water is to be poured for use by a servant. If, on the other hand, washing is to be done in a pond, mud need not be brought. Rivers and watering places that are near temples or near God should never be used for purposes of washing after passing the faeces. While washing in ponds mud should not be brought from any other place From a place under water, which is as deep as the hand up to the wrists upper limit (a depth of ९ to १० inches), mud must be taken and it should be placed on the ground about ९ to १० inches away from the edge of the water, after sprinkling that space with water Then this mud is used for washing along with water. The left hand is used for washing. It is to be placed between the knees of the two legs and the right hand is kept outside the knees to the right. With his right hand he takes the mud and puts it into his left hand. If passing of the urine and faeces had been done at the same time, cleaning for the faeces has to be done first, and then for urination. If the process of urination and defaecation are at different times, the cleaning has to be done according to the process which has taken place earlier. The cleaning for urination is done by using the mud for cleaning six times and for the passing of the faeces it has to be used twelve or fifteen times. Between one cleaning and another the left hand has to be cleaned five or six times with mud and water. While doing the cleaning for urination, mud about the size of a nellikai (fruit of Phyllanthus emblica) has to be used. For cleaning for defaecation for the first time a handful of mud, for the second and the third time half of this quantity and for the remaining or subsequent washings mud about the size of two nelli fruits should be used.

After using the hand for doing the washing once, it has to be washed with mud and water to clean it, and then it is again used for the purpose of washing. During the process of washing the hand enough water should be used, so that all the mud may be well removed from the hand. If the thigh and other parts are soiled they should be cleaned seven times.

Then getting up he should clean his left hand ten times with mud and water and his legs seven times with water similarly. Both his hands have to be cleaned ten or seven times with clean water. If it is only after urination, three or five washings with mud and water are enough. The left hand has to be washed five times using mud and water, and then both the hands, three times only, with pure water. Then the finger nails have to be cleaned and washed properly. The place used for washing has also to be cleaned. If sperm has come out without one's knowledge along with the urine all the processes have to be done twice as much as for urination. During the day time the processes have thus to ७-A [[०५७]]
[[५२]]

be calculated. During night time half of this has to be done. While travelling only onefourth of the above may be done. As far as women are concerned they have to do only half of the number of times that a male has to do. Brahmacharis have to do twice as many times; Vanaprasthas and monks have to do four times as much. For people who are not well in health the cleanings have to be done according to their strength, ie., as many times as they can stand. The point to be observed in such cases is only removal of bad things, smell and in cases of piles pain is to be avoided during the cleaning. After the washings he proceeds and on reaching water side he washes his hand and feet well. He also washes his mouth by means of water four or six times if after urination and eight to twelve times if after defaecation. After washing his mouth he puts on his sacred thread (Yajñōpavitam) properly and does achamanam twice or thrice.

## SIPPING OF THE WATER (ACHAMANAM).

The sipping of the water or achamanam with the proper mentality and mantras is enjoined on all occasions as a purificatory thing. So when the ceremonies or the usual daily observances of any kind are to be begun achamanam has to be performed. For doing achamanam one should sit in a clean place, not squatting, but on feet and knees facing east or north Both the hands are to be kept inside the knees. Touching the hand with the left hand he takes in his right hand as much water as would just be sufficient to drown a seed of black-gram. Then repeating the mantram "Om achyutaya namah" (I bow to Achyuta) he sips water; this process of sipping water is repeated twice more repeating each time the mantrams "Om anantāya namaḥ” (I bow to Ananta)

and "Om Govindaya nanah" (I bow to Govinda) respectively. After sipping three times with the base of the right thumb he wipes his lips twice and then touches the various parts of the body one after the other repeating the appropriate mantras again, after washing the base of the thumb and wiping, as detailed below :- First with the tip of the right thumb of his right hand he touches the right and left cheeks repeating the mantras "Om kēśavāya namah" (I bow to Kēśava) and "Om Nārāyanāya namaḥ" (I bow to Narayana). Then touching the ring-finger at its base with the tip of the thumb bring the tip of the ring finger in contact with the right eye repeating the mantra "Om Madhavaya namah" (I bow to Madhava) and touching the left eye repeat "Om Govindaya namah" (I bow to Govinda). With the tip of the fore finger, whilst the thumb is at its base he touches the right and left sides of the nose repeating the mantras "Om Vishnavēnamah" (I bow to Vishnu) and "Om Madhusūdanaya namah" (I bow to Madhusūdana). With the little finger and the thumb at its base he touches the two ears saying the mantras "Om Trivikramaya namah" (I bow to Trivikrama) and "Om Vamanāya namah" (I bow to Vamana). With the middle finger and with the thumb at its base he touches the right and the left shoulders repeating "Om Śrīdharāya namaḥ" (I bow to Śrīdhara) and "Om Hrshikeśāya namaḥ" (I bow to Hrshikēśa). With the right palm touch the navel repeating "Om Padmanabhaya namah" (I bow to Padmanabha) and with all the fingers united the head is touched pronouncing the words "Om Damodaraya namah" (I bow to Damodara).

[[०५८]]
## CLEANING OF THE TEETH.

The cleaning of the teeth is next begun. For this he washes his feet and does achamanam twice. Facing east or north and covering his head with his upper cloth he secures from one of the plants mentioned below a piece of stick six to eight inches long, one and a quarter to one-third of an inch thick, straight, free from nodes, worms and empty hollow portions. The piece he plucks for use must be from one of the following plants :--- Calotropis, banyan, Acacia arabica, Achyranthes, margosa, mango, and others with juice and prickles. The sticks of Bombax, Ficus religiosa, Prosopis spiggera, Areca palm, Butea frondosa, plantain, cotton, darbha grass, cocoanut and nanal grass should not be used. While plucking the stick for use as tooth-brush he is expected to repeat the following mantram:--"Ayurbalam yaśō varchaḥ prajām paśuvasūni cha . brahma prajñām cha medham cha tvanno dehi Vanaspate." This when translated into English reads thus "Oh! king of the wood give us life, strength, fame, brilliance, children, cows, riches or property, knowledge of God, intelligence or wisdom."

While cleaning the teeth with the stick of any one of the plants mentioned above the mantra given above may be repeated. If sticks are not available, and if cleaning with sticks is prohibited as on some days, then leaves alone are used.

Beginning with the left side of the lower row of teeth, the leaf or the stick is taken round in the pradakshina way by polishing the teeth and then in the end the tongue is cleaned with it. Beginning with the lower teeth on the left side he should go round the teeth upwards and finish with the wiping of the tongue with the split stick. The stick is cleaned and then it is thrown on a clean ground towards the south-west corner. The mouth has to be rinsed with water sixteen times. On ceremonial days such as prathama, full-moon day, shashti, chaturdaśī, ekādaśī, ashtami, janmanakshatra (star under which one is born) of three kinds one should not use the sticks. On amavasya day and ekādaśī day he should use for cleaning the teeth only Eugenia jambolana (naval) and mango leaves.

On the śraddha day, nothing is to be used, only rinsing of the mouth with water is allowed.

Cleaning of the teeth must not be done in a cow-shed, temple, sacred river, burning ground (smaśānam), in a clean place, water and sacrificing grounds. Water used for the rinsing of the mouth should not be swallowed. After the rinsing of the mouth two achamanams are to be done.

## BATHING OR SNANAM.

One who intends bathing in a tank or river should go to a place where God is usually brought or where Bhagavatās bathe. Selecting such a place he should clean with water the place he intends sitting, wash his legs and hands and then sit on this space facing east or north. While sitting he should wear on his ring-finger of the righthand the pavitra, usually of darbha grass twisted, and do prānāyāmam three times.

The method of doing pranayamam is described below---The pranāyāmam an important item and it is resorted to in almost every ceremony and at frequent intervals in each.

[[०५९]]
[[५४]]

The left nostril is pressed down by the little and ring-fingers of the right-hand and the air inside the lungs is expired through the right nostril. The right nostril is then pressed by the thumb of the right hand so that the right nostril is closed and the two fingers on the left nose are released. As much air as can be taken in is drawn in by the left nostril and then both the nostrils are pressed and the eyes and the mouth are closed. In this condition, think of God, and the sapta Vyahrtis, Gayatri and Gayatri's head are then pronounced thrice After this all the air taken in is expired out through the right nostril and the right ear is touched pronouncing the pranavam "Om." Then with his hands in the posture of prayer he repeats the usual hierarchy of his Acharyas Next he repeats the tithi, varam, and nakshatra after repeating "Śri Govinda "and performs the usual sankalpam for snanam (bath). Repeating of "The bala mantra" and of the "Satvikatyāga mantra" follows. He may also repeat ślokas about "Sacred water" if he knows them and also about Acharyas.

The person who wants to perform these rites should think of service to God and nothing else. He is to repeat the following:- "Svaśēsha bhūtēnamayā svakīyaiścha dehendriyāntahkaraṇaiḥ svakīyairēva kalyā- natamaiḥ aupacharikasāmsparśikābhyavaharikaiḥ bhogairakhilaparijanapariśśhadanvitam svātmānam prītam kārayitumupakramate "-In English this means "God with all his attendants and paraphernalia begins to make Himself pleased with the most auspicious materials which are His own and some of which are intended for doing honour, some for creating pleasure by touch and some for eating, supplied by me who is His servant through my body, senses and mind all of which are given by Him." Next he goes to the side of the water and washes his hands and feet in a clean place, does achamanam and then cleans a space on the shore He then takes a quantity of mud from a clean place repeating the ashtaksharamand places it on the spot already cleaned, dividing it into two parts Taking mud from the larger part he wipes with it his body to remove the dirt from his body and bathes in water. After bathing he sits on the bank, thinks of God and performs the pranayamam thrice. He then takes the other portion of the mud into his left-hand, divides it into three parts and sprinkles water over them separately. Repeating the múla mantra he takes one part from three parts in his hand and does digbandhanam by repeating the astramantram With another part of this mud a pitham is made intended for the water which is to be sprinkled later on. The third part of the mud is used for smearing over the body. He then washes his hands and taking water in both of his hands pours or sprinkles it over the pitha made with one part of the mud. The water thus poured or sprinkled is considered to be the holy water of the Ganges coming from the right foot of God. While pouring the water ashṭakshara is pronounced and again taking water with both his hands and repeating the mūlamantra seven times he sprinkles over his head this water three or five times. Next he takes a small quantity of water in his right hand and takes in the same quantity of water repeating the ashtaksharam. After this he performs an achamanam and sprinkling over himself some water, he immerses himself in the water. While under [[०६०]]
[[५५]]
water he should imagine that his head is below the feet of God and he should be repeating the ashtaksharam as many times as he can possibly do. Then he comes out of the water, places his right leg in water and the left leg on the land and then sits. In this posture he does achamanam once. He then stands on the shore and repeats slokas about Acharyas and God and cleans with two cloths his body -with one his head and with another the other parts of his body. Afterwards he sprinkles water thrice repeating the three vyāhṛti mantras over the cloths placed in the "Tiruppakkūdai". Then repeating "Děvasya tva savituḥ prasavēśvinor bahubhyām pūshno hastābhyāmādade." This when translated into English runs: "By the direction of the deity who directs all I take you by the hands of Asvins and by the hands of Pūsha." The cloths are taken and then repeating "Udutyam jātavēdasam dēvam vahanti kētavah dṛśē viśvāya sūryam” which means "The rays support that sun who knows all that are born, so that people may see him" they are shown to the sun. Then repeating the mantram "Avadhūtam raksho avadhūtā arātayah" which means "Let the enemies be destroyed and let those who do not give money perish." The cloths are shaken; with the words "Avahanti vitanvāna kurvāṇā chīra mātmanaḥ . vāsāmsi mamagāvaścha annapānēcha sarvada . tatomē śriyam avaha", which means "First give me wisdom and then bring me prosperity very soon; bring me clothes, cows, food and drink, make them increased and make them remain with me." He wraps the cloth round his head, and then taking his yajñōpavitam (sacred thread) and making it niviti winds it round his right ear and then wears his kaupinam (piece of under cloth). Then he washes his hands and knees with mud and water and wears his lower and upper cloth. After this he washes his feet, does achamanam twice and one prānāyāmam. He then does sankalpam saying "Śrībhagavadājñaya Śrīmannārāyaṇapprītyartham mantrasnānam karishyě" (By God's order and with a view to please Śrīmannarayana I am doing this both by repeating the mantras). Next repeating "Apōhistha mayōbhuvah . tāna urje dadhatana . maheraṇāya chakshase . yōvassivatamo rasah tasya bhajayate hanah . usatīriva mātarah . tasmā aranga mamavah yasyakshayāya jinvatha . apo janayatha chanah . " (for the meaning of this see page ६१) he sprinkles water over legs, head and sky, then over head, sky and legs and finally over sky, head and legs. Then he meditates on bathing and imagines of having bathed. He then thinks of God as existing with the effulgence of a crore of suns, as carrying sankham, chakra and gada in his four hands, and as having a kirita on his head and bracelets and other ornaments. He should think of the feet of God who is holding sankham and chakra, and also think of Ganges falling from the feet on his head and entering his head through the brahmarandhra and cleaning both externally and internally. The wet cloths which he used before while actually bathing must not be placed in front of him but by his side. It he is a weak person he may use hot water for the bath. If, however, he is unclean due to death, etc., he ought not to use hot water. If a person is too weak to bathe the head, he can bathe up to the neck or up to the navel and clean the upper part with a wet cloth. If he is not strong enough even to do this he may adopt any method mentioned in the śastras as suiting his capacity.

[[०६१]]
## PUTTING ON THE URDHVA PUNDRAM.

The person who is about to put on the ūrdhvapundram (marks made on the forehead and parts of his body with a kind of white clay and turmeric powder) takes water in a coconut-shell or "Tirthahari." From this coconut-shell he takes a little water and pours it into his left hand by means of an uddharani (a spoon) made of gold, silver or wood.

With this water he cleans his left hand repeating the astramantra "Vīryāya astrāyaphat." Then repeating the pranavam he places the tiruman (white clay or mud) in his left hand in his palm Then repeating the mantram "Gandhadvaram durādharsham nityapushṭām karishinim . Isvarim sarva bhūtanām tvamiha upahvaye śriyam" (this when translated runs thus "I invite here the deity of Earth who is resorted to by all, who is perceived by smell, who is not overcome by enemies, who is always full of plenty, who is full of cattle (cows, buffaloes, etc.,) and who creates and directs all the objects of creation] the tiruman is rubbed in and dissolved in a small quantity of water. Then with astra mantra ashṭadigbandhanam is done. (The eight directions are closed by the repetition of the mantras). Then by repeating the pranava the tiruman is dissolved in water by rubbing it in the palm, the mūla mantra is repeated over it, then Nrsimha bijakshara is written on it and it is then dissolved and mixed well by using the fore finger. Then over this he repeats the mantra "Vishnor-nukam Viryani pravōcham yaḥ pārthivani vimamē rajāmsi yöaskabhāyaduttaram sadhastam vichakramāṇastrēdhōrugāyah." This when translated runs thus "I shall fully describe the powerful deeds of Vishnu who is extolled by great men, who created the three lights, namely, fire, lightning and the sun on Earth, the intermediate region and the sky or heaven and who created the very extensions, the antariksha which supports the three worlds by walking over them with a stride in each (or who has firmly established heaven which is above all worlds and where yögis dwell)." He also repeats the dwadaśākshara mantra. After this he repeats the following mantra "Vishnoraratamasi vishnoh prshthamasi Vishnoh snaptrestho vishnōssyūrasi Vishnor dhruvamasi Vaishnavamasi visnavētvā uddhrtasi varāhēṇa krshněna śata bāhunal bhūmir dhēnūr dharanibhūtadhārini . mrttikē hanamēpāpam yan mayā dushkṛtam kṛtam . tvayā hatēna pāpēna jīvāmi śaradaśśatam . mrttikë dehī më pushtim tvayi sarvam pratishthitam." This when translated runs thus "You are the forehead of Vishnu, you are the back of Vishnu, you are the joints of the lips of Vishnu, you are one that connects us with Vishnu, you are as firm as Vishnu, you have Vishnu as the presiding deity, and you are Vishnu himself. Oh Earth! you have been brought back by the thousand hands of Vishnu in his boar incarnation; you are like the milch cow always giving us what we require; you are the bearer of truth and support all objects of life Oh Earth! destroy my sins and destroy all bad acts that I have done. Having been relieved of my sins let me live one hundred years. Oh Earth! give me comfort, for all the objects capable of giving comfort are stationed in you." He then takes with the index finger a small quantity of tiruman dissolved in the hand and smears it over the head repeating the pranavam at the same time. With the fourth finger pavitra finger) he makes marks of tiruman on the face and other parts of the body in [[०६२]]
[[५७]]

regular order as detailed below. After putting on the namam in the face, it is put on the following places in the order given :-central place in the abdomen, centre of the chest, neck in front, right side of the abdomen, right shoulder, right side of the neck, left side of the abdomen, left shoulder, left side of the neck, lower portion in the centre at the back of the body and back of the neck. While making the marks of namam in each of these places mentioned above, the twelve names of God are repeated beginning with "Om Kēśavāya namaḥ." The names of God repeated in definite order are as follows:- Kēśavāya namaḥ, Narayanāya namaḥ, Madhavaya namaḥ, Govindāya namaḥ, Vishnave namaḥ, Madhusūdanāya namaḥ, Trivikramāya namaḥ, Vamanāya namaḥ, Śrīdharāya namaḥ, Hrshikēśāya namaḥ, Padmanabhāya nainah and Damodarāya namaḥ." After putting on the twelve namams if there should remain any quantity of tiruman it is smeared over the head repeating the dvādaśākshara mantram. He then makes marks of Śrichūrṇa in the middle of the namams. For making the marks with śrichūrnam Lakshmi's turmeric must be mixed with it.

While marking with śrīchurna the following mantras must be repeated, one for each mark made:-face-Śriyai namaḥ; middle of the abdomen just above the navel-Amrtod bhavāyai namaḥ; middle of the chest-Kamalāyai namaḥ; front of the neck-Chandrasōdaryai namah; right side of the abdomen-Vishnupatnyai namaḥ; right shoulder-- Vaishnavyai namaḥ; right side of the neck-Varārōhāyai namaḥ; left side of the abdomen-Harivallabhāyai namaḥ; left shoulder--Sarnginyai namah; left side of the neck-- Devadēvyai namaḥ; back at the lower portion just above the waist--Maha Lakshmyai namah; neck at the back-Lokasundaryai namaḥ; and top of the head- Sarvabhishta phalappradāyai namaḥ." The namams in order are then touched repeating the mantras "Kēśavāya namaḥ" etc., one after the other. Then with folded hands the following mantra must be repeated:-- "Chatuschakram namasyāmi kēśavam kanakapprabham Nārāyanam ghanaśyāmam chatus Sankham namāmyaham Madhavam manibhangabham chintayāmi chaturgadam chandra.

hāsam chatuśśārngam Govindam ahamāśrayē ॥ Vishnum chaturhalam vande padma kinjalka sannibham . caturmusalamabjabham samśrayē Madhusūdanam . agnivarnam catuh khadgam bhāvayāmi trivikramam ॥ Vamanam bala sūryābham chaturvajram vibhāvayē . Śrīdharam pundarīkābham chatuppattasam āśrayē . chaturmudgaramabhyēmi Hrshikesam tatit prabham . panchayudham Padmanabham pranamāmyarkarochisham . Damodaram chatushpāśam indragopanibham bhaje ॥ Vasudevamupāsēham pūrnēndvayuta sannibham." This when translated into English runs thus: ---"I worship Kēśava of the lustre of gold and who is in possession of four chakras or discs. I worship Narayana of deep black colour and possessing four sankhas or conches Imeditate on Madhava of the lustre of the cut surface of a diamond and possessing four gadas or maces. I take refuge in Govinda of the lustre of the moon and possessing four saranga or bows. I bow to Vishnu who is as beautiful as the filament of a lotus and possesses four halas or ploughs I take refuge in Madhusūdana of the lustre of a lotus and possessing four musala or wooden pestles. I contemplate on Trivikrama of the colour of agni or fire and who is in possession ८
[[०६३]]
[[५८]]

of four khadgas or swords. I worship Vamana of the lustre of the dawning of sun and possessing four Vajras or thunderbolts. I take refuge in Śrīdhara of the colour of lotus and possessing four paṭiasa or spears with sharp edges. I meditate on Hrishikeśa of the colour of lightning and possessing four mudgaras or hammers. I salute Padmanabha of the brilliance of the sun and possessing the five weapons of Vishnu. I take refuge in Damodara of the lustre of fire flies and possessing four pasa or nooses. I meditate on Vasudeva who is as beautiful as ten thousand moons put together." While repeating the above the hands which are pressed together should be moved towards the correct namam at the repetition of the suitable mantram. Afterwards the twelve Tamil stanzas of Sriman Deśika is repeated praising each deity in one stanza.

After making the pundrams on the various parts of the body as detailed above the palms of the hands should not be cleaned with water. If the time at one's disposal is short, or if the person is weak, instead of the twelve namams, two may be put on, one in the face and the other at the back of the neck. These two namams should always be put on and one should not fail to do this. Now-a-days almost all Śrivaishnavas who are not Vaidikas put on only two namams on all ordinary days. They put on the twelve namams only on ceremonial days.

Then the following ślōkas and pasuram should be repeated in the order given :--- "Asmad gurubhyo namah . asmad parama gurubhyo namah . asiad sarva gurubhyo namaḥ . Śrīmate Vedanta guravě namaḥ . Śrīmate Ramanujāya namaḥ . Śrīmate Maha Purṇāya namaḥ . Śrī Rāma Miśraya namaḥ . Śri Pundarikakshaya namah . Śrīman Nathamunaye namah . Śrīmaté Śathakopāya namaḥ . Śrīmate Vishvaksēnāya namaḥ . Śriyai namaḥ . Sridharaya namah . Asmad Dēśika masmadiya paramāchāryānaśēshān gurūn śrīman Lakshmana yögi pungava mahā pūrṇau munim Yamunam . Ramam padmavilochanam muni-varam natham śathadvēshiṇam śēnēsam sriyamindira sahacharam Nārāyaṇam samśraye॥." The Tamil stanza quoted here of Śriman Vedanta Dēsika is also repeated. The names of acharyas are mentioned in this stanza.

" ऎऩ्ऩुयिर तन्दळित्तवरैच् चरणमबुक्कि याऩडैवे अवर्गुरुक्कळ् निरैवणङ्गि पिऩऩरुळाल् पॆरुम्बूदूर् वन्दवळ्ळल् पॆरियनम्बि आळवन्दार् मणक्काल् नम्'पि नऩ्ऩॆऱियै यवागगुरैत्त उययगॊण्डार नादमुऩि सडगोबऩ् सेऩै नादऩ् इऩ्ऩमुदत्तिरु मगळॆऩ ऱि वर्गळैमुऩ्ऩिट्टु ऎम्बॆरुमाऩ् तिरुवडिग ळडैगिऩ्ऱेऩे."
-See page ८.

In the above Sanskrit and Tamil stanzas only the prominent Azhvars and Acharyas are mentioned. He should in addition to this repeat the slokas in praise of his own Acharya. During the time of repeating the above he should be wearing round his neck garlands made of tulsi beads, lotus fruits, and must wear in his right hand a pavitra on the pavitra finger.

[[०६४]]

[[५९]]
## OFFERINGS OF WATER AND RICE TO DEVARSHIS AND FOREFATHERS (DĒVARSHI PITR TARPANAM)

The performer cleans his hand and feet with water and then does achamanam and sankalpam to perform the Devarshi and Pitr tarpanams as follows:--" Śrīman Narayana pprītyartham snānāngam dēvarshi pitr tarpaṇam karishye." He performs the tarpanam believing that devatas, rshis and pitrs have in them the amsam of God. That is to say he should believe that the spirit of God is in all these.

Then repeating the following mantras he does tarpaṇam, l.e., leaves water mixed with rice and sesamum in his hands as described below :--- "Brahmādayō yēdēvāstān dēvāmstarpayami . sarvān dēvāmstarpayāmi . sarvadēva ganāmstarpayāmi . sarva dēva patnīstarpayāmi . sarvadeva ganapatnīstarpayami." This in English means "I please all Devas from Brahma downwards by the libations of water. I please all Devas by these libations of water. I please all troops of Devas by these libations of water. I please all the wives of the Devas by these libations of water.

I please all the wives of the troops of Devas by these libations of water." Repeating the above he does his tarpanam through the tips of his fingers. Now he has his sacred thread in the usual way, t.e., in the proper way.

He then puts on his sacred thread round his neck with both the hands outside the thread (i e. as nivIt!) and holding with both the thumbs the sacred thread does tarpanam repeating the following. That is he pours water mixed with rice and sesamum while repeating the mantras.

"Om Krishna dvaipayanādayō yē rshayah tan rshīmstarpayāmi . sarvan rshimstarpayāmi . sarva rshi gaṇāmstarpayāmi . sarva rshipatnīstarpayāmi . sarva rshi gana patnīstarpayami . ".

This when translated runs thus:-- "I please all sages from Vyasa onwards by these libations of water. I please all sages or hymn singers by these libations of water. I please the whole host of patriarchal sages by these libations of water. I please all the wives of the sages by these libations of water. I please all the wives of the whole host of patriarchal sages by these libations of water." Then with the sacred thread (yajñōpavita) as prachinaviti (i.e., putting on the sacred thread on the right shoulder and placing the left hand through so that the sacred thread passes round the right shoulder above and the lower portion of the thread passes on the left side below the left shoulder) he proceeds with the tarpaṇam as detailed below. He repeats the following mantra while doing the tarpaṇam:-- "Somahpitsman yamōngirasvan agnikavya vahanadayo ye pitarah tan pitrmstarpayami . sarvān pitrmstarpayami . sarvapitrganāmstarpayaini . sarvapitṛpatnīstarpayāmi . sarva pitsganapatnīstarpayāmi." This means "I please all the Manes commencing from Soma, pitrman, yama, Angirasvan, agni, kavyavahana and others by these libations of water. I please all the Manes by these libations of water. I please ८-A [[०६५]]
[[६०]]

the whole class of Manes by these libations of water. I please the wives of the Manes by these libations of water. I please the wives of the whole class of Manes by these libations of water." The above tarpaṇam is performed by pouring water mixed with rice and sesamum between the thumb and the index finger.

Then repeating the following mantra "Urjam vahantīramṛtam ghrtam payah kilalam pariśṛtam svadhasta tarpayatame piton" water is thrown three times after taking the water round in a pradakshina manner on the left side. This water must be thrown thrice on the bank saying each time "Trpyata, trpyata and trpyata." The meaning of the above passage iS May these waters please my Manes, those waters which contain the essence, issuing from flowers, which may be classed as essence of food, ghee and milk which are capable of curing all diseases, preventing death and relieving the bondage of man." Then putting on the yajñopavita in the proper way he does achamanam.

This deva-rshi-pitr-tarpaṇam should not be performed when one does not bathe fully immersing wholly under water or when he is under pollution due to the death of some near relation.

## MORNING PRAYERS (MORNING SANDHYAVANDANAM).

The Sandhyāvandanam is performed by the very orthodox Brahmans as detailed in Ahannikams (books describing the various rites usually observed by the orthodox Sri Vaishnava Brahmans). Sri Vaishnava Brahmans who are not orthodox perform this Sandhyavandanam using only some of the mantras, leaving out many as of secondary importance.

The ceremony of Sandhyāvandanam is begun by doing achamanam twice. After doing the achamanam the performer repeats Srībhagavadājñyayā śrīmannārāyaṇa prītyartham prātassandhyamupasishye." This when translated runs thus :- "I am now engaged in the prayer during the morning of twilight under the orders of the divine Lord for propitiating the Lord Narayana who is associated with Lakshmi "
After repeating the above mantra the performer repeats "Kritanchakarishyāmi." Then he repeats "Pratassandhyāvandanākhyēna bhagavatkarmana bhagavantam archayishyāmi." This when translated runs as follows:-"I worship the divine Lord by this divine action known by the name of prayer during the morning twilight." Next he repeats the mantra beginning with "Bhagavato balēna" and repeats the bala mantra to its end which is "Bhagavato Vasudevasya." This when translated runs thus:- "By the strength given by God of the Divine Lord Vasudeva. He then begins by repeating "Bhagavānēva" and does satvikatyāga by repeating "Prātassandhyōpasanakhyam karmasvasmai svaprītyae svayamēva kārayati." This when translated runs thus :-"God himself makes me do the action of morning prayer for his own gratification.

•
"
If one does not put on the namams as already described he should make the marks of namam using water with the right pavitra finger at the right place and repeat the proper [[०६६]]

[[६१]]
mantras. Then repeating the mantra "Apōhishtheti mantrasya sindhudvipa rshih dēvīgāyatrīchandah apo dēvatā" he touches the head, nose and the chest with the four fingers except the thumb. This means sindhudvipar is the rshi of the mantra. The chandas for this is "Devīgāyatri" and the devata is "Ap." Then repeating the words "Prokshanë viniyogah." he should touch the water with his right hand. He should then place his fingers with their tip outward and scatter over himself water by repeating certain mantras detailed below. Repeating the pranava he scatters over himself water once, then with the three vyāhṛti mantras, with gayatri and repeating the mantra beginning with "Apōhishtha " he should scatter water over himself. Repeating all these mantras he should sprinkle water over his head only, but while repeating "Yasyakshayāya jinvatha" he should sprinkle water over his knees. The mantra repeated is "Apōhishtha ma yobhuvah . tāna ūrjē dadhatana maheraṇāya chakshase yövaśśivatamōrasah tasya bhajayatehanah usatīriva mātarah tasmā aranga mamavah yasya kshayāya jinvatha apōjanayatha chanah Om bhūr bhuvassuvah." This when translated reads as follows:-- "Oh! waters that are in this form representing Paramatma! you are responsible for our happiness. Bestow cooked rice (or food) to us for use with our beautiful indriyas (such as sight, etc.). That which you consider as an auspicious rasa, make us have that rasa just like mothers. That rasa which resides in you and makes you loving, for that rasa we are likely to trouble you incessantly. Oh! waters make us to be born ones?" Towards the end he says "Om bhūr bhuvassuvah." This represents the pranava coupled with Vyāhrti-traya and while repeating this he should sprinkle water around himself.

Afterwards repeating the words "Sūryaschetyanuvākasya agnirshih . dēvīgāyatri chandaḥ sūryōdevatā" he should touch his head, nose and chest. (This touching is called nyasam.)

For the above anuvaka "Sūryascha "rshi is agni, chandas (metre) is dēvī gāyatri and sun is dēvata. (For the sake of atmaśuddhi he drinks this water after repeating the following mantra.) Repeating" Apām prasane viniyogah" water is taken as if for achamanam. The Sanskrit words when rendered into English mean: "This water is intended for drinking" Taking water in the hand as for achamanam the following mantra is repeated. "Sūryascha mamanyuscha manyupatayascha manyukrtěbhyah' pāpēbhyo rakshantām . yadrātryā pāpamakārisham . manasā vāchā hastābhyām padbhya mudarēṇa śiśnā rātristadavalumpatu . yatkincha duritam mayi . ida maham mamamṛta yönau / sūryejyotishi juhōmi svaha" . and he drinks the water by sipping The above passage when translated reads as follows:-- "Sun, anger and the raga, etc., which are gods to anger protect me from the sins caused by anger. Any sin that might have been committed by me during the night by my mind, voice. hands, feet, belly and male organs be destroyed by 'ratri' (the night). If there is any other sin in me let that also be destroyed.

Let me offer as a sacrifice my atma or life principle to the Surya who is brilliant with effulgence. This is the homa mantra." [[०६७]]
Then achamanam is done. Then repeating the following mantra "Dadhikrāviṇṇēti mantrasya Vamadevarshiḥ . anushtupchandah . Dadhikrāva devatā," he touches his head, nose and chest. (This is doing nyasam.) This means the rshi for the mantra "Dadhikr- āviṇno" is Vamadeva rshi and the chandas (metre) is anustup and Dadhikrava is the devata." Water is sprinkled over repeating the mantra "Apam prōkshane viniyogah." and then the following mantra is repeated and water is sprinkled over the head during the recital "Dadhikrāviṇṇo akarisham . jishnō raśvasya vājinaha . surabhino mukhā- karat . praṇāyāmshitārishat . apohishtamayōbhuva Om bhūr bhuvassuvah." This when translated means: "I am only praising Dadhikrāva who is the successful person, who is permeating everything and who is the protector of all. May our faces be made to appear bright. May our 'ayus' (period of life) be free from troubles Repeating "Om bhūrbhuvassuvah" he surrounds himself with water by sprinkling it around.

He then does praṇāyāmam and does sankalpam as follows:-- "Sri Bhagavadājñaya Śrimannārāyaṇapprītyartham prātassandhyārghyapradanamkarishye." Some people omit this sankalpam. The performer standing repeats Arghya pradana mantrasya viśvāmitra rshih devīgāyatrichandah . savita devatā "and does" nyasa." He then says: "Arghya pradaně viniyogah" and spreads out his hands and bring them together.

He then takes water in his hands keeping all his fingers close together, his thumbs far apart and then repeating the pranava, Vyahṛtitraya and gayatri and thinking of God who is residing in the centre of the sun, raise the hands as high as the brows and throws the water down. If while doing this, the sun is visible, prānāyānam and sankalpam are done as follows:-"Śri Bhagavadājñaya Śrīmannārāyaṇaprītyartham pratassandhyā kālātīta prayaschittārtham turſyārghya pradanam karishye." ("By the order of God and with a view to please Narayana I am pouring this water as a prāyaschitta for doing it after the proper time" is the translation of the above.) Then repeating the seven vyāhrtis and the gayatri he gives one arghya. Then repeating "Asāvādityō Brahma" along with pranavam and vyāhṛti trayam he sprinkles water round himself in a pradakshina manner. Afterwards he does achamanam and taking water in both his hands, having the palms together and the thumbs apart, pours it down twelve times repeating each time one of Kesava's names.

The first is "Keśavam tarpayami"; the second throwing of water is done repeating Nārāyaṇam tarpayami"; the third Madhavam tarpayami"; the fourth Govindam tarpayami"; the fifth "Vishnum tarpayami"; the sixth "Madhusudanam tarpayami"; the seventh is "Trivikramam tarpayami"; the eighth is "Vamanam tarpayami"; the ninth is " Śrīdharam tarpayami"; the tenth is "Hrshikesam tarpayami"; the eleventh is "Padmanabham tarpayami"; and the twelfth is "Damodaram tarpayami.

Then one achamanam is done.

If the japam is to be performed standing in water, he should stand in knee-deep water. In case he wants to do on the shore, he has to place one leg in water and the other above on land and in a sitting posture he has to do the ceremony One should not perform sandyha with wet clothes on. In case he has to do with wet clothes on he has to [[०६८]]

[[६३]]
stand in water knee-deep and do japams of the Sandhyāvandana. In this case he cannot do pradakshina and namaskarams. Strictly speaking the performer of Sandhya is expected to go to a temple or other clean spots and do the japam there.

The place intended for the japam is sprinkled with water after the repetition of the pranavam and vyāhrtitrayam and darbha grass is spread and on it he sits for doing japam.

During japam he sits facing east. Thus sitting on the darbha grass, facing east, he does "nyasa" repeating the mantra "Asana mantrasya pṛthivyā mēru prshta rshih sutalam chandaḥ . Śríkūrmo dēvata." This when translated runs thus. "For the mantra intended for sitting, Prthivya meruprshṭa is the seer or sage, the meter is sutalam, and the presiding deity is Kurma." Then repeating "Asane viniyogah" with hands together and up in a saluting posture prayer is offered to the earth thus: - "Prthvi tvaya thritā lokāḥ dēvi tvam vishnuna dhrta . tvam cha dhāraya mām dēvi pavitram kuruchasanam." This when translated runs thus "Oh! Earth the whole world consisting of the movable and immovables is borne by you. You are borne by Vishnu. Oh Goddess! You please hold me. Make my seat pure."

He afterwards does nyasa repeating the following mantra - "Pranavasya rshih brahma dēvī gāyatrīchandah paramātmā dēvata." For pranava the rshi is Brahma dēvīgāyatrī is chandas (metre) and paramātmā is the devata. Then he repeats Bhūradi saptavyāhrtinam Atri Bhrigu Kutsa Vasishta Gautama Kaśyapāngirasarshayaḥ . gāyatryushniganushtup brihati panktih trishtup jagatyahchandāmsi agniś vāyu arka vāgīśa Varunendra viśvēdēvā dēvātah." This when translated means "The seven vyāhrtis are bhūh, bhuvah, suvah, mahah, janah, tapah, and satyam." (In front of each of these the pranava "Om" should be added). For the Vyāhrti Bhūh Atri is rshi gāyatrī is chandas and agni is dēvatā; for the vyāhrti "Bhuvah" Bhrigu is rshi, ushnik is the chandas and Vayu is devta; for the vyahrti "Suvah" Kutsa is rshi, anushtap is the chandas (metre) and sūrya is dēvatā; for the vyāhṛti "Mahah" Vasistha is rshi, brihati is chandas (metre) and Bṛhaspati is dēvatā; for the Vyahrti "Janah" Gautama is rshi, pankti is chandas (mette) and Varunan is the devata; for the Vyahrti "Tapah 'Kaśyapa is rshi, trishtap is chandas (metre) and Indra is devatā"; for the vyāhṛti "Satyam" Angiras is rshi, jagati is chandas (metre) and Viśvēdēva is the devatā." Savitrīya rshi Viśvāmitrah . devīgāyatrichandah . savita devatā." This when translated runs thus: "For Savitr Viśvāmitra is rshi, gāyatrī is chandas (metre) and Savita is the devatā." "Śiraso Brahma rshih anushtup chandah paramātmā dēvata . ." When translated this is as follows:--"For the head of the gayatri thershi is Brahma, anushtup is chandas metre) and paramatma is devatā."

Repeating the above, nyasam is done and then repeating "Sarvesham pranayamg viniyogah" he says "Om bhūh" and touches the legs; he repeats "Om bhuvah " and touches the knees; repeating "Om suvah" he touches the thighs; repeatine [[०६९]]
[[६४]]

"Om mahah" he touches the belly; he touches the chest repeating "Om janah"; he touches the nose repeating "Om tapah"; he touches the head repeating "Om satyam"; then repeating "Om tatsavituh jñānāya hrdayāya namaḥ ".

touches the heart with the thumb and the index finger; repeating "Om Varenyam aiśvaryāya śirasē svaha" touches the head with the four fingers except the thumb; repeating "Om bhargō devasya śaktyai sikhāyai vaushat" touches the tuft of hair (hair-knot) with the thumb (by the middle of the thumb); repeating "Om dhimahi balaya kavachaya hūm" touches from the neck to the waist in the body; repeating "Om dhiyo yonah tējasë nētrābhyām vaushat" touches both the eyes simultaneously with the index finger and the middle one; then repeating "Om prachodayat vīryāya astrāyaphat" slaps the two hands together, snaps the fingers and does "Digbandhanam" round the head. Then he thinks of the deity by repeating "Muktāvidruma hēma nīla dhavalacchāyair mukhai stikshanaih yuktāmindukalanibaddhamakutām tatvārtha varnātmikām . gayatrim varadabhayāmkuśakaśāḥśubhram kapālam gunam sankham chakra mathāravinda yugalam hastair vahantīmbhaje." This when translated runs "In the kirita we may see the moon and in the body five faces, three eyes in each face; faces have the colour of pearl, coral, gold blue and white; there are ten hands and in them are found varadana mudra, abhaya mudra, amkuśa, Kaśai (Korada-stick with a rope tied), white kapalam, rope, sankam and chakram; she has two lotuses and she is "Sarva tatva svarupiṇi (one knowing and in the form of tatvam) "Sarvārtha svarūpint" (embodiment of all wealth or money) "Sarvakshara rūpini" (having all the letters) I am saluting such a gayatri." So saying he salutes and with the chief part of the gayatri (i.c., repetition of "Om") touches the body from the head to the feet.

Repeating the above, and repeating the gayatri portion "Om . apōjyōtīraso amṛtam brahma bhūrbhuvassuvarōm" he smears the whole of his body with both his hands. He at the same time thinks of God by repeating "Arkamandala madhyastham sūryakoti Samaprabham! brahmādi sevya pādābjam noumi brahmaramāsakham". This when translated runs as follows: -"I am thinking of Sriyappati by praising Him who resides in the centre of sūryamandala, who is as brilliant as a crore of suryas, whose feet are served by Brahmans and others and who is the Para Brahma rupi". After praying to God as above he does pranayamam three times. Then touching the right ear he repeats the following as sankalpam :" Śrī bhagavadājñayā śrimannārāyanaprītyartham ashtottara sahasram (or ashtottara śatam, or daśavāram) pratassandhya gayatri mantra japam karishye." Then he says "Ayatvityanuvākasya, Vama dēva rshih . anustup chandah . gayatri devatā " and touches the head, nose and heart (does nyasa). This is followed by saying "Gayatri avāhane viniyogah." The above when translated runs thus:"For the anuvāka beginning with "Ayatu" the rshi is Vamadeva, anustup is chandas (metre)

and gayatri is devatā." The gayatri is avahanamed in the heart by the anuvaka Ayatu." The performer then repeats "Ayatu varadādēvyaksharam brahma samhitam . gāyatrīm chandasām mātēdambrahma jushasva nah! ōjōsi sahōsi balamasi bhrājōsi dēvānām dhāma nāmāsi viśvamasi viśvāyuḥ sarvamasi sarvāyurabhi bhūrōm gāvatrim [[०७०]]
[[६५]]
avāhayāmi" and does avahanam. This when rendered in English runs thus:---"The devatā gāyatrī, who is capable of satisfying all the wishes of those who pray to her, who is ever present, who is equal to the pranava and who is the mother of all the chandas has to come here and accept our praises in Veda ślokas; you are the power holding the indriyas, you are rapid in your motions, you are the power, you are bright, you possess the tējas of the devatās, you are everything and you are capable of increasing the age of everything; you are supporting the things yourself that are dear to you; you are the person causing changes in time; you are the person capable of destroying all sins; I am requesting the presence of such gāyatrī in the form of praṇavam." After this he contemplates repeating the following:--- "Pratardhyāyami gāyatrīm ravimandala madhyagam! rg vedamuchcharayantim raktavarnām kumārikām! akshamālākaram brahmadaivatyam hamsavāhanam." This when rendered into English runs thus :- "It is called gāyatrī in the morning. That devatā remains in sūryamandala. It is repeated by rgveda and the colour is red; when age is considered it is young. It has in its hands "Akshamala" and its vāhanam is "Hamsam". Its devatā is "Brahma ".

Then Nyāsa is done repeating the following mantra:---" Praṇavasya ṛshi brahmah, dēvīgāyatri śhandaḥ paramātmā devatā ॥ bhūradi sapta vyāhṛṇam vyāhṛtitrayasya atri bhrgu kutsā rshayah gāyatryushniganustup chandāmsi agnivāyvarkā devatāḥ . savitriya rshiḥ Viśvāmitrah devīgāyatrichandāḥ savitā dēvatā." The translation for the above is as follows:--"The rshi of the Praṇavamantra is Brahma; the metre of the mantra is the holy Gāyatrī; the deity that has been contemplated by the mantra is the Paramātma (God). Atri, Bhrigu and Kutsa are the rshis of the three vyāhṛtis beginning with Bhū. Their metres are Gāyatrī, Ushṇik, and Anushtup.

Agni (fire), Vāyu (wind) and the Sun are the deities contemplated by these mantras.

Viśvāmitra is the rshi of Savitr mantra; its metre is the holy Gāyatrī and Savita is the deity contemplated by this mantra." He then says "Jape viniyogah" and touches the various parts of the body by repeating the following mantra:-He smears the outside and inside of both his hands saying "Viryāya astrāyaphat"; he touches and smears from base upwards the thumbs by his index fingers repeating “Om bhūh angushtābhyām namaḥ"; he smears with his thumb the index finger repeating "Om bhuvah tarjanībhyām namaḥ "; he smears with the thumb the middle finger saying "Om suvah madhyamābhyām namaḥ"; he smears the nameless (४th finger) saying "Om tatsaviturvarenyam anamikābhyām namaḥ "; he smears the last and the little finger saying "Om bhargodevasya dhīmahi kaniṣṭhikābhyām namaḥ by the thumb. Repeating "Dhiyo yonāḥ prachodayāt karatala karaprishṭhābhyām namaḥ" smear both the hands inside and outside.

Then he does anganyāsam as follows:----Repeating "Om bhūh jñānāya hṛdayāya namah" he places his right hand on his chest touching it with the thumb and indexfingers; repeating "Om bhuvaḥ aiśvaryāya śirasēsvāhā" he places the four fingers, ९
[[०७१]]
[[६६]]

[G.S,
except the thumb, on the head; repeating "Om śvaḥ śaktyai sikhāyai vaushat" he touches his tuft of hair with the lower part of his thumb; repeating "Om tatsavitur varēṇyam balāya kavachaya hūm" smear the body from the neck to the waist; repeating "Om bhargo devasya dhimahi tējase nētrābhyām vaushat" with the tips of the index finger and the middle finger he touches both the eyes at the same time; repeating "Om dhiyō yonaḥ prachodayat vīryāya astrayaphat" presses the knuckles of the hand so as to produce a noise (snaps the fingers) on the right side and does "Digbandhanam." After doing the anganyasa he repeats the sloka "yōdēvassavitāsmākam dhiyō dharmādi gocharah prerayet tasya yadbhargastadvarēnyamupasmahe . ". This passage when translated runs thus:---" We contemplate over that very high tējas (light) which is emanating from the sun and that is the deva giving us the knowledge of dharmam, etc.

(Here is sūrya in the mandala in which Śriman Narayana is residing)." Then he contemplates on God repeating:-"Aditya mandale dhyāyēt paramatmanamavyayam . vishnum chaturbhujam raktapankajāsana madhyagam . kiritahara keyūra kaṭakadivibhashitam Sri Vatsavanamala Sri tulasi kaustubhōjvalam . harim pitambaradharam Sankhachakragadadharam . prasannavadanam ratnakundalair manditānanam . sarvaratna samayuktasarvabharanabhūshitam." This passage when rendered into English runs thus: - We should meditate on Vishnu who is eternal and the soul of the universe or the Lord of all as living in the disc of the sun. He should be meditated as possessing four arms, as seated in the middle of red lotus, as having been ornamented by a crown, garland, bracelets in the arms and zones, etc., as having been more resplendent by the mole called Srivatsa on the chest, by wearing the garland Vanamala, a garland of tulasi leaves and wearing the jewel kaustubha in his breast as wearing a golden coloured silk cloth, as holding the Sankha (conch) the chakra (discus)

and gada, as having a very clear face, as having his ears ornamented by diamond earrings, as having been adorned with several jewels set with all kinds of precious gems." He places both the hands, under the upper cloth, closing them and then does the gāyatrī japam repeating the gāyatrī and counting them from the lowest lines of the last finger, the upper lines of the same finger, then the top lines of the next two fingers, the three marks of the index finger and the two lowest marks in the middle and the fourth finger.

These ten marks of the right hand are counted in the direction of the clock. One is expected to do १,००८ gāyatris or १०८, or १८ if he finds no time for doing १,००८ times. While doing gāyatrī japam, it should not be pronounced by the mouth, but it should only be thought of in the mind. In the gāyatrī those who follow the Yajurveda should pronounce while repeating the gāyatrī "Varēnyam." Brahmacharis should stop at the words at the end of the pranavam, at the end of the Vyahrtis, at the end of the words "Varenyam, dhīmahi and prachodayat." Grihasthas (married men) should not stop the repetition at the end of the pranava but may stop at the other four places mentioned above.

Then gāyatris are finished in one pradakshina and then this is counted as one ten in the left hand. During japam he should not talk with any person. He should not see [[०७२]]

[[६७]]
wicked men, śūdras, and devatāntarabhaktas (outcastes, that is those who worship others than true God). If it so happens that he has to see them while doing the japa, he should see the sun after seeing them. It he has to talk to them he should think of his old Acharyas, or punyapurushas If while doing japam Acharyas and Bhagavatars (elderly men of the same persuasion) come he should get up, do namaskāram and with their permission finish the japam afterwards.

As soon as the japam is finished, he does the pranayamam and the sankalpam repeating "Pratassandhyā gāyatri upasthanam karishye." Then he does nyasa repeating "Uttamētyanuvākasya Vamadeva rshih . anushtup chandah . gayatri devatā" and says "gayatri udvasane viniyogah." Translation:--" For the anuvaka beginning with uttaimē sikhare devi' the rshi is Vamadēva, anustup is chandas and gayatri is devatā " It is used in removing the gayatri dēvatā from its place.

،
Then he repeats the following standing, with hands in a praying posture "Uttamē śikhare devi bhūmyām parvatamūrdhani . brāhmanebhyōbhyanujñānam gaccha dēvi yathā sukham" and continues "Mitrasyēti trichasya viśvāmitra sshih adyasya birūt chandah . parayör gāyatri trishṭūbhau chandasi mitro devatā ॥ " and does nyasa and says "Pratassandhyopasthanë viniyogah." Translation:-"Oh devi! After being given leave by Brahmans you may proceed to the holy top of the mountain where you were beforehand with pleasure." The mantra "Mitrasya" consists of three riks. The rshi for this is Viśvāmitra; for the first rik birūt is chandas, for the second rik gayatri is chandas and for the third trishtubhi is handas; dēvata is Mitra. For all the three it should be done as upasthānam in the morning sandhyā ceremony.

Then upasthāna is done by repeating the following mantra:--" Mitrasya charshinī dhṛtaḥ sravōdēvasya śānasim satyam chitrasravastamam . mitrojanānyātayati prajanan . mitro dadhāra prithivīmutadyām . mitraḥkrishtīranimishabhichashte satyaya hayyam ghṛtavad vidhēma prasamitra martto astu prayasvan . yasta aditya sikshatir vratena . nahanyate najſyatétvōtō naiyna magam ho aśnot yantitōna dūrat." This when rendered into English runs thus: "I am praising the kirti or good name of Sūrya (Sun)

who is the dēvāta supporting so many beings and this good name is truthful, capable of being well attained and it is very wonderful to hear. This Mitra knowing the karmas of every human being treats him according to his karma. This Mitra is the supporter of this earth and svarga. This sun looks after the human beings without closing his eyes.

To him we offer food with ghee for obtaining full strength. Oh Mitra Sūrya Narayana the cause of everything, who worships you with interest becomes united with the result of his actions; he, who is protected by you will never be worried by any disease. He will not be conquered by his enemies. Further, sins will not approach him, either from near or far, who is protected by you." The above upasthāna refers to God who is supposed to be in surya mandala. After repeating the above the worshipper holds up his hands together in the posture of prayer ९-A [[०७३]]
६८ Bulletin, Madras Government Museum. (G.S., and turns round clockwise (pradakshina) the four corners of the compass saying "Om Sandhyāyai namaḥ." Om savitryai namaḥ. Om gayatryai namaḥ Om sarasvatyai namah. Then he says "Sarvabhyō devatābhyō namo namaḥ, kāmökārshit manyurakarshit" and salutes by prostrating on the floor and does abhivādanam. Then again he salutes the directions saying "Om prāchyardiśēnamaḥ" (I am saluting the east), "Om dakshiṇāyai diśēnamaḥ (I am saluting the south), "Om pratichyai diśēnamaḥ. (I am saluting the west). "Om udichyai diśēnamaḥ." (I am saluting the north). Then lifting his hands over his head he repeats "Om ūrdhvaya namaḥ" and then turning his hands towards the earth he repeats "Om adharāya namaḥ "; again lifting his hands upwards in a prayerful posture he says "Antarikshaya namah" and then turning his hands towards the earth repeats "Om bhūmyai namaḥ"; finally he prostrates saying "Om Vishnavēnamah." Then holding up his hands he says "Dhyēyassada savitr mandala madhya varti nārāyanah sarasijāsana sannivishtah kēyūravan makarakundalavan kirīta hārīhiranmayavapuh dhṛtaśankhachakraḥ ॥ sankhachakragada pāṇē dwara kaṇilayacchyuta govinda pundarikaksha rakshamām saranagatam . namo brahmanyadēvāya göbrahmaṇa hitāya cha, jagaddhitāya krshṇāya govindaya namo namaḥ." This is a prayer offered to God in the sūryamandala After this prayer the man does abhivādanam. The above prayer when rendered into English runs thus: - "Śrīmannārāyana always staying on a padmāsana with bracelets for upper arms, makarakundalas in his ears, kiriṭa on his head, hāra (garland) and other ornaments and with a body brilliant with yellow gold colour is one to be thought of at all times. He must be contemplated thus as one abiding in the orb of the sun, as one sitting on a lotus flower, as wearing bracelets in the arms, makarakundalas in ears, a crown on his head, garlands and other ornaments, with a body of golden colour and as holding sankha and chakra in his arms. Save me, Oh God, who lives in Dwārakā, who does not desert one who believes in you. Oh Govinda, with eyes as beautiful as the lotus. (At this he prostrates himself for absolution from his sins). I am saluting the feet of Krshṇa who is the dēvatā of the Brahmans, who is always doing good to the cows and the Brahmans, who always thinks of the good of the world and who always protects the cows as his." If the japam is finished before sunrise, the upāsthānam should be done only after sunrise. So till the rise of the sun he should be repeating ashtakshara. If sandhyā is performed after sunrise the upāsthānam may be done and the sandhyā concluded. In the morning the japam may be performed either standing or sitting. In the midday he should stand and in the evening he should sit during japam.

## REPETITION OF THE ASHTĀKSHARAM.

This japam is performed only by those who have been initiated fully and by those who have passed through the ceremony of prapatti (See Pl I-A).

The japa is begun by repeating the taniyans (stanzas in praise) of his own Āchārya who initiated the performer and taught the vākya gurupāramparā, Ślōka [[०७४]]

[[६९]]
guruparamparā, mantra, mantrartha, and then he should repeat the mūla mantra twenty-five times and do prāṇāyāmam. Then he performs the sankalpam repeating the following mantra :- " Śri bhagavadajňaya Srimannārāyanaprītyartham prātāśsandhyāyām ashṭōttara śatakritvah (or daśakritvah) ashtaksharamahamantrajapam karishye." He does nyāsam repeating as follows:-" Asya śrīmad ashtakshara maha mantrasya badarikāśramavasinārāyaṇa rshih dēvī gāyatrīchandah . paramātmā śrīmannārāyanō dēvata," and then contemplates about Narayana. The translation in English of the above is "Narayana rshi is the seer of the divine, eight syllabled mantra, the metre is the divine gayatri, the presiding deity is Narayana associated with Lakshmi and the Lord of all." The contemplation of Narayana is done by repeating the following:--- "Aum bijam, āyaśaktiḥ, mām kīlakam, hrim kavacham, buddhistatvam, udattādisvaraḥ . Śrī Vaikuntham Kshetram jīvaparamātmanōḥ svasvamibhāvassambandhah . śrimannārāyanaprītyarthe japë viniyogaḥ "॥.

Then repeating the tirumantra he smears the inside and outside of his hands and does anganyāsas and karanyāsas.

He does aksharanyāsa as is usually done. Then he does nyasa as in the gayatri japam repeating "om om angushthābhyām namah . om nārāyaṇa madhyamābhyām namah . om om anā nikābhyam namah . om kanishthakābhyām namah om nārāyaṇāya karatalakara prshthābhyām namah." Then he does anganyasa repeating "Omom jñānāya hrdayāya namaḥ om namah aiśvaryāya śirasēsvāhā . om nārāyaṇa śaktyai śikhāyaivaushat om om balaya kavachaya hum om namaḥ tējasë nētrābhyām vaushat . om narāyaṇa vīryāya astraya phat॥ ".

Folding his hands and saluting he repeats the following dhyāna sloka :-"Savyam pādam prasārya śritaduritaharam dakshinam kunchayitvā jānunyādāya savyētaramitarabhujam naga bhoge nidhaya . paśchat bahudvayēna pratibhataśamanë dhārayan śankhachakre devi bhūshadi jushto janayatu jagatam sarma vaikuntha nathah." The translation of the above is as follows:---"May the Lord of Vaikuntha give happiness to all the world, who is seated on the serpent couch with his left leg hanging down, with his right leg which removes the distress of its refugees bent and kept erect over the couch, with his right arms placed over the right knee and with his left hand resting on the couch and who is holding the sankha and chakra which are used in quelling his enemies by his two backarms and who is in company with his wife and adorned by several ornaments and other things." He thinks of Para Vasudeva after repeating the above ślokas. Then he thinks of God by repeating the following slokas and then does japa of "Tiru ashtakshara" "Iha sangrahataḥ śrīmān gōptā śeshi samādhika daridrah . śaraṇam sarvaśarīri sēvyaḥ prāpyaścha sadhubhirbhavyah" and "Padatrayētra samkshepat bhavyananyarhaseshata ananyōpāyatā svasya tathānanyapumarthata "॥ The above passages when translated are as follows:--"In short the Lord of the Universe has to be conceived by Sri Vaishnavas as having Lakshmi as his consort, as the protector of all, as the master of all, as having [[०७५]]
७० Bulletin, Madras Government Museum. [G.S., poverty, as not having an equal or superior, as the only refuge, as having the whole universe as his body. and as the only one to be served and reached." "In brief the purport that should be conceived from the three words are that no other than Narayana associated with Lakshmi is the master, the means to attain him, and the end or aim to reach." Then with hands raised together he contemplates on God repeating: -"Kshirambhonidhiratnamandapamahāsauvarnasimhasane vāmanke sthitayā prasannavadanaś I- kantayālingitam . dordandankitaśankhapankajagadachakrairudāra śriyam tvām nityam kalayāmi janma vimukho Lakṣhmīśa Narayana "॥. This passage when rendered into English runs as follows:-"Oh Narayana, Lord of Lakshmi, feeling a deep aversion to births, I daily contemplate on You, as having been seated on a golden throne supported by lions, placed in a temple of diamonds in the centre of the milky ocean, as having been embraced by Lakshmi of pleasant face sitting on Your left thigh, and as appearing more beautiful by holding Sankha, lotus, gaḍā and chakra in Your hands."

ĀDHĀRAŚAKTI TARPANAM.

Afterwards he does dvayam, charama ślokam, dvādaśakshara and Shaḍakshara according to the time available and means.

This is begun by achamanam and then Pranayamam. The ceremony is begun by repeating the following sankalpam:-"Śrī Bhagavadajñaya Śrīmannārāyaṇa prītyartham ādhāra śaktyāditarpaṇam kariśye." Repeating the above he takes water with both the hands, as in keśavādi tarpaṇam during sandhyā. Then he does tarpaṇam with this water repeating the following mantras:-"Om adhāraśaktāi namaḥ Om prakrtyai namaḥ . Om akhila jagadhādhāraya kūrma rūpine Narayanaya namaḥ . Om anantāya Nāgarajāya namaḥ . Om bhūm Bhūmyai namaḥ . Om Śrī Vaikunthāya divya lokāya namaḥ . Om Śrī Vaikunthāya divya jana padāya namaḥ . Om Śrī Vaikunthāya divya Nagarājāya namaḥ . Om Śrī Vaikunthāya divya vimānāya namaḥ . Om ānandamāyāya divya mandapa ratnāya namaḥ . Om astarana rūpāyānantāya Nāgarājāya namaḥ . Om dharmaya pitha pādāya namaḥ . Om jnanaya pitha pādāya namaḥ . Om vairāgyāya pitha pādāya namaḥ . Om aiśvaryāya pitha pādāya namaḥ . Om adharmāya pītha gātrāya namaḥ . Om ajñānāya pithagātrāya namaḥ . Om avairāgyāya pīthagātrāya namaḥ . Om anaiśvaryāya pithagātrāya namaḥ . Om abhiḥr parichinnatanave pithabhrte sadātmane anantāya nāgarājāya namaḥ . Om ashṭadala padmāya namaḥ . Om vimalāyai chamarahastāyai namaḥ . Om utkarshinyai chamarahastāyai namaḥ . Om jnānāyai hasthāyai namaḥ . Om kriyāyai cāmarahastāyai namaḥ . Om yogāyai chamarahastāyai namaḥ . Om prabhvai chamarahastāyai namaḥ . Om satyāyai chamara hastāyai namaḥ--Om Iśānai chamarahastāyai namaḥ . Om anugrahāyai chamara hastāyai namaḥ . Om jagatprakṛtaye divyayoga pithāya namaḥ-- Om divya yoga paryankāya namaḥ . Om sahasraphaṇāmani maṇḍitāya anāntāyanagarājāya namaḥ . Om pada pithātmane anantāya Nagarājāya namaḥ . Om sarva parivārāṇām padmāsane [[०७६]]

[[७१]]
bhyo namaḥ . Om anantagaruda Vishvaksēnānām sapithaka padmāsanebhyo namaḥ . Om asmadgurubhyo namaḥ . Om Śrimate Narayanāya namaḥ . Mūlamantre namaḥ . Om Śrīm Śriyai namaḥ . Om bhūm Bhūmyai namaḥ . Om nim nīlāyai namaḥ . Sarvabhyō bhagavad divya mahishtbhyo namah . Om kiritayamakutadhipataye namaḥ . Om kirīţa mālāyai apīdātmaně namah . Om dakshina kundalaya makarātmane namah . Om Vāmakundalāya makarātmane namah . Om Vaijayantyai Vanamālāyai namaḥ . Om Śrīmad tulasyai namaḥ . Om Śrīvatsaya Śrinivasaya namah . Om haraya sarvabharanadhipataye namah . Om kanchi gunōjvalāya divyapītāmbarāya namaḥ . Om sarvebhyō bhagavad divya bhūshanebhyo namah . Om sudarśanāya hetirajāya namaḥ Om nandakaya khadgādhipataye namah . Om Padmaya namah . Om Panchajanyaya śankhādhipataye namah! Om kaumodakyai gadādhipatyai namaḥ . Om Sarngaya chāpādhīpataye namah . Om sarvabhyo bhagavaddivyayudhebhyo namaḥ . Om Sarvabhyō bhagavatpādaravinda samvahinībhyo namah . Om anantaya nagarajāya namaḥ . Om Sarvebhyo bhagavat parijanebhyo namah . Om Bhagavat padukābhyām namah . Om Sarvebhyō bhagavat paricchadebhyo namah . agratah Om Vam vainatēyāya namah . Om Bhagavate Vishvaksēnāya namaḥ . Om gam gajānanāya namaḥ . Om jam jayatsēnāya namaḥ . Om ham harivaktrāya namaḥ . Om kam kalaprakṛtisamjñakāya namah . Om Sarvebhyō bhagavadvishvaksēna parijanebhyo namah . Om chandaya dvārapālaya namah . Om prachandaya dvārāpālāya namaḥ . Om bhadraya dvārāpalaya namah . Om subhadrāyadvara pālāya namaḥ . Om jayāya dvarapalaya namah . Om vijayāya dvārapālāya namaḥ . Om dhātre dvārapālāya namaḥ . Om vidhātrě dvārapālāya namah . Om sarvebhyo Bhagavaddvārapalebhyo namah . Om kumudāya janādhipatayě savahana parivāra praharanāya namaḥ. Om kumudakshaya gaṇādhipatayē savāhana parivāra praharaṇāya namaḥ. Om pundarikaya gaṇādhipatayē savāhana parivāra praharaṇāya namaḥ . om vāmanāya ganādhipataye savāhana parivāra praharanāya namaḥ . Om Sankukarnaya ganādhipatayē savāhana parivāra praharanaya namah . Om sarvanētrāya ganādhipatayē savāhana parivāra praharaṇāya namaḥ . Om sumukhāya gaṇādhipata yē savāhana parivāra praharaṇaya namah . om supratishthitāya gaṇādhipatayē savāhana parivāra praharaṇāya namah . om sarvebhyo bhagavat parshadebhyo namaḥ . Iti santarpya devarshi kanda rshi pitr tarpaṇam karishye." The above when translated runs thus :---"Om salutation to the support which supports the Vaikuntha loka. Om salutation to primordial matter Om salutation to Narayaṇa in the form of tortoise who is the supporter of the whole universe. Om salutation to the serpent king Ananta. Om salutation to the earth. Om salutation to Vaikuntha, the divine world. Om salutation to the population of Vaikuntha. Om salutation to the divine city of Vaikuntha. Om salutation to the dome of the divine world. Om salutation to the divine mandapa which is blissfull. Om salutation to the king of Nagas who is in the form of bed to Vishnu. Om salutation to Dharma which supports the seat of Vishnu. Om salutation to Aiswarya which supports the seat of Vishnu. Om salutation to adharma which embodies the seat of Vishnu Om salutation to ignorance which embodies the seat of Vishnu. Om salutation to Avairagya which [[०७७]]
[[७२]]

embodies the seat of Vishnu. Om salutation to Anaiswarya which embodies the seat of Vishnu. Om salutation to Ananta who is the king of Nagas or serpents, who is of good soul, and who is supporting the seat embodied by these devatas. Om salutation to the lotus of eight petals. Om salutation to vimala, chamara holder. Om salutation to Utkarshini, another chamara holder. Om salutation to Jnana another chamara holder.

Om salutation to Kriya another chamara holder. Om salutation to Yoga another chamara holder. Om salutation to Prabhu, another chamara holder. Om salutation to Satya another chamara holder. Om salutation to Isana, another chamara holder. Om salutation to Anugraha, another chamara holder. Om salutation to the divine Yoga-seat which is the embodiment of primordial matter of the universe. Om salutation to the divine Yogi-bed.

Om salutation to Ananta, the naga-king ornamented by the diamonds of his thousand hoods. Om salutation to Ananta, the naga-king who embodies the support on which Vishnu rests his foot. Om salutation to the lotus seat of the several followers of Vishnu.

Om salutation to the lotus seats with bases of Ananta, Garuda and Vishvaksena. Om salutation to my preceptors. Om salutation to Narayana associated with Lakshmi (This may be done even with the ashtakshara mantra). Om Srim salutation to Goddess Lakshmi. Om bhum salutation to Earth. Om Nim salutation to Nila. Salutation to all the divine Consorts of Vishnu. Om salutation to the presiding deity of the crown of Vishnu. Om salutation to the chaplet tied round the crown of the head. Om salutation to the makara kundala in the right ear of Vishnu. Om salutation to the makara kundala in the left ear of Vishnu. Om salutation to the garlands known by the name of Vaijayanti and Vanamala. Om salutation to the tulasi plant or leaves. Om salutation to Srinivas the abode of Lakshmi. Om salutation to the garland and to the lord of several ornaments. Om salutation to the divine pitāmbara which is made more resplendent by the zone worn over it. Om salutation to all the various divine ornaments. Om salutation to Sudarsana the lord of missiles. Om salutation to Nandaka the lord of swords. Om salutation to the lotus. Om salutation to Panchajanya the lord of sankhas or conches. Om salutation to Kaumodaki the lord of all gadas. Om salutation to the Sarnga the lord of all bows. Om salutation to all the various divine weapons. Om salutation to all the shampooers of the lotus feet of Vishnu. Om salutation to Ananta the Naga-king. Om salutation to all the attendants of Vishnu. Om salutation to the sandals of the divine Vishnu. Om salutation to all the paraphernalia of Vishnu. Firstly om salutation to Garuda. Om salutation to the holy Vishvaksena. Om gam salutation to the elephant-faced. Om jam salutation to Jayatsena. Om ham salutation to Hari Vaktra. Om kam salutation to the kala prakrti.

Om salutation to all the attendants such as Vishvaksena and others. Om salutation to the door-keeper Chanda. Om salutation to the door-keeper Prachanda. Om salutation to the door-keeper Bhadra. Om salutation to the door-keeper Subhadra. Om salutation to the door-keeper Jaya. Om salutation to the door-keeper Vijaya. Om salutation to the door-keeper Dhatri. Om salutation to the door-keeper Vidhatri. Om salutation to all the door-keepers of Vishnu. Om salutation to Kumuda, a lord of all attendants, with his [[०७८]]
१९३०. [[७३]]

vehicle, attendants, weapons, etc. Om salutation to Kumudaksha, a lord of all attendants, with his vehicle, attendants, weapons, etc. Om salutation to Pundarika, a lord of all attendants, with his vehicle, his attendants and weapons. Om salutation to Vamana, a lord of all attendants, with his vehicle, attendants and weapons. Om salutation to Sankukarna, a lord of attendants, with his vehicle, attendants and weapons. Om salutation to Sarvanetra, a lord of attendants, with his vehicle, attendants and weapons.

Om salutation to Sumukha, a lord of attendants, with his vehicle, attendants and weapons. Om salutation to Supratishthita, a lord of attendants with his vehicle, attendants and weapons. Om salutation to all the various leaders or lords of attendants.

Having pleased all the above deities by offering libations of water by uttering the mantras whose meanings are given above I shall then please the Devas, Rshis, Kanda Rshis and Pitrs by libations of water." After repeating the above he does tarpanam repeating the mantra ending with "Sarva rshiganapatnistarpayami" and then repeats the following:--"Om prajapatim kanda rshim tarpayami. Om Somam Kanda rshim tarpayāmi Omagnim kānda rshim tarpayami.

Om visvandēvān kanda rshīmstarpayāmi. Om samhitir devatā upanishadastarpayāmi.

Om yajñakir devatā upanishadastarpayami. Om brahmānam svayambhuvamstarpayami; sadasaspatimtarpayāmi." This when translated runs thus:-"I please Prajapati a rshi of a particular kānda of the Veda by this libation of water. I please Soma, a rshi of a particular kānda of the Veda by this libation of water. I please Agni, a rshi of a particular kānda of the Veda by this libation of water. I please Visvēdēvās, rshis of particular kāṇḍas of the Veda by this libation of water. I please the deity of the Upanishads known by the name of Samhita by this libation of water. I please the deity of Upanishads by the name of Yajña by this libation of water. I please Brahma, who was self-born, by this libation of water. I please Sadasaspati by this libation of water." Repeating the above mantra he does tarpanam by pouring water after each mantra. Then the other tarpanams are done repeating the appropriate mantras.

Then achamanam is done. He puts on the sacred thread as "nivīti" and the wet upper cloth folded in four and repeats the following mantra:-"Yeke chasmat kulē jātā aputra gotrajā mrtah te grhnantu mayādattam vastranishpīdanodakam." The meaning of this passage is as follows:-" Those who were born in our lineage and are dead without sons and those who were born in our gotra and are dead without sons let them receive these libations of water given by me, got by squeezing out this cloth." After repeating the above mantra he takes the wet cloth folded into four in an apradakshina manner and twists it so as to make the water flow out. Then the cloth thus treated is placed on his left wrist and he puts on the sacred thread properly and then does achamanam twice. The avahanams of tirthas that were done during the snanam must now be done so as to do avahanam within himself. The "Vastranishpidana" (ceremony of pressing out the water from the cloth described above) should not be done on dvādaśi and pournami days. On amāvāsya days, sankramana days and śraddha days the Vastranishpidanam is done after the tarpaṇa sraddhas. If one's father is alive the Vastranishpidanam should not be performed.

[[१०]]
[[०७९]]
[[७४]]

Then satvikatyagām is done by repeating the mantra beginning with "Bhagavānēva " and ending with "Pratassandhyōpāsanākhyam karma svasmai svaprītayē svayamēva kāritavan." This when rendered into English runs thus :- "The divine Lord done this act, viz., the prayer at the morning twilight, himself, for his own sake and for his own gratification." Then he finishes the pratassandhyā by repeating "Pratassandhyopāsanākhyena bhagavatkarmaṇā bhagavān priyatām Vasudevah." This in English runs thus: "May the divine Lord Vasudeva become pleased by this divine act of prayer at the morning twilight." BRAHMA YAJNAM This part of the ceremony is begun by the performer doing achamanam and prāṇāyāmam and then sankalpam is done as follows: "Śrī Bhagavadājñaya Śrīman Narayanaprītyartham brahmayajñēna yakshye." Afterwards he repeats "Kritamcha karishyāmi brahma yajñēna bhagavantam Vasudevamarchayishyāmi." The above in English runs thus:- "I am doing what has been done. I shall worship the divine Vasudeva by brahmayajña. By the power of our Lord, etc.

The divine Lord makes me do this brahmayajña himself for his own sake and for his own gratification." After the above he repeats the bala mantra thus:---"Bhagavato balēna", etc. He then does satvikatyāga by repeating thus: "Bhagavaneva.

brahmayajñākhyam karmasva Karayati" After this he repeats the mantra "Vidyudasi Vidyame papmānamrtat satyamupaimi," "Oh deity you are the cause of separation Make my sins go away from me. From this water I reach satya or Paramātmā." He then takes water with the right hand and cleans his left hand with it. Then without uttering the mantras he performs achamanam three times. He then cleans his hand with water, wipes his mouth, touches his head with all his fingers, with the fourth finger he touches his eyes, his nose be touches with his forefinger or the second one, his ears are touched by his fifth finger and his chest he touches with the palm of his hand Every time he touches the above parts he also touches the water and wipes his hand without uttering any mantra Finally he washes his hands, places darbha or spreads it as asana and sits on it Then he puts on pavitras on both the hands and does prānāyāmam three times He next places his right leg on the left leg, keeps his two hands joined together on the knee of the right leg and, says “Om bhūh, om bhuvah, om suvah, om tatsavitur varēnyam, om bhargō dēvasyadhīmahi, om dhyōyōnah prachdayat . on tatsavitur varē- nyam bhargō devasya dhīmahi om dhiyōyōnaḥ prachodayat, om tatsavitur varēnyam bhargō dēvasya dhīmahi dhiyōyōnah prachodayat" Instead of this the following may be substituted :-- Om bhūh tatsaviturvarēnyam, om bhuvah bhargō devasya dhImahi, om suvah dhiyō yōnaḥ prachodayat . om bhūh tatsaviturvarēnyam bhargōdēvasya dhīmahi om bhuvah dhiyōyōnāḥ prachodayat, om suvah tatsaviturvarenyam bhargōdēvasya dhimahi dhiyo yonaḥ prachodayat, om bharbhuvassuvah tatsaviturvarēnyam bhargo devasya dhimahi dhiyōyōnaḥ prachodayat " If the performer is a samavedi instead of the above he has to repeat the following: "Tatsaviturvarenyam om, bhargōdēvasya dhimaht om, dhiyōyōnaḥ prachodayat om tatsaviturvarēṇyam bhargō devasya dhimahi om [[०८०]]
dhiyōyōnaḥ prachodayat, om tatsaviturvarēnyam bhargo devasya dhīmahi dhiyōyōnah prachodayat om, bhūh bhuvaḥ suvaḥ purushah satyam om." He should also repeat after the above, gāyatri sama and vyahrti sama.

Then the performer repeats the following:- "Harih om agnimide purohitam yajñ- asya dēvamṛtvijam hōtāram ratnadhatamam . Harih om Harih om . Ishētvōrjetvā vāyavasthō pāyavastha dēvōvassavitā prārpayatu śreshthatamāya karmane Harih om Harih om . Agna āyāhi vitaye grṇānō havyadātaye nihō tā satsi barhishi." This passage runs in English thus:---I praise Agni (fire god) who secures homa or oblations for sacrifice or who is in front of me, who is endowed with the quality of giving gifts, who is the hota (one of the four kinds of officiating priests) of the sacrifice and who is the giver of enormous wealth.

"Oh Palaśa branch! I am cutting you in order to use you as an offering to Devas (in order to give food and strength to the devas). Oh calves! go away from your mothers to the forest to eat grass and again return to your master's house in the evening.

Oh cows! the Supreme Lord that is within you prompts you to go to the forest to eat grass so that your milk may be used in sacrifices.

"Come Agni! to eat the sacrificial offering and to carry the sacrificial offerings to the Devas. Sit on the holy grass as Hota being praised by us." If the performer is a Samavēdī he should repeat the following instead of the above;- "The sama beginning with "Om agnayi." Then he should say "Harih Om Harih Om śannodēvīrabhishtaya apōbhavantu pītaye samyōrabhiśravantunaḥ . Harsh Om".--The English version of the above is:--"Oh waters! be of comfort to us by removing our sins, be of use to our sacrifice, be of use to our drink. Remove all our diseases that have already afflicted us and kept us away from diseases that have not begun to afflict us. Sprinkle over us to purify us." Some say that the performer should repeat the beginning or the characteristic portion of his own Veda. Then he is to repeat a śakha or some part of his Veda daily. If he does not know Vedas he must at least repeat the purusha sūkta. In case he is not acquainted with this, he is expected to say his gayatri ten times. After this he says "Om bhūr bhuvas suvah . satyam tapaḥ sraddhāyām juhomi" once. This is followed by the repetition of "Om namo brahmaṇē namðastvagnaye namaḥ pṛthivyai nama oshadhibhyah . namovāchē namovāchaspataye namo Vishṇave / brhatë karōmi" three times. This in English is as follows:--"Salutation to Brahma, salutation to Agni, salutation to Earth, salutation to the woods, salutation to Speech, salutation to the Lord of Speech, salutation to Vishnu.

I do this for the Vedas." Then he repeats the following :- "Vishtirasi vriśchamēpāpmānamrtat satyamupāgāni” and takes water in the right hand and cleans the left palm and then does achamanam.

The above passage when translated into English runs as follows:--" Oh deity! you are the cause of separation, remove all my sins. From the water I have reached satya or paramā- tma." Then satvikatyāgam is done repeating the usual mantra as follows:--"Bhagavānēva brahmayajñākhyam karma kāritavan." This in English would run thus :-The १०-A [[०८१]]
[[७६]]

Divine Lord has himself done the act, viz., brahma yajña. Then samarpanam (finishing offering) is done by repeating the following :---- "Krtamcha brahmayajñēna Vasudevah." This in English runs thus:-Iam doing what has been done. May Vasudeva become pleased by the Brahma yajña. If one fails to perform the brahma yajñam, while doing the morning sandhyavandanam, he may perform this ceremony after the madhyahnikam or Vaiśvadeva ceremony.

After performing brahma yajña the performer proceeds to a temple to pray to God. While proceeding to the temple on his way he should show respect to the following doing pradakshina round them:-- God's temple, Acharya, a scholar who is proficient in pancharatra śastra, a ficus tree, a banyan tree, cow, a meeting of big men and house of his Acharya. On reaching the temple he should prostrate, at least twice for each, before Vishvaksēna and Dvārapālakas and with their permission he enters the temple.

On entering the temple he must prostrate as many times as he can before God and after the prostrations he should stand on the right side of the God. Then he should feel that he is to be a servant of God, and he should repeat guruparampara before this. On account of seeing God who is pure and capable of attracting one's mind, one feels very much pleased. He begins to repeat stotras of God (praises of God) capable of attracting God's attention. There he should obtain sacred water, tulasi and other prasādams after prostrating. He should use them with proper obeisance and feeling of respect to God.

He should think that he is purified by thus worshipping God and taking permission from God he should sit within the temple in a place and do japam by repeating "Tirumantrams Then he comes out from inside the temple. He should not turn round his body while leaving the temple. He should not show his back portion of the body to God.

He should leave the temple facing God. On leaving the temple thus without any apacharams, he is to show respect to Vishvaksēna and take his permission to leave the temple. On coming out he is to take water in a vessel of gold, silver or copper and go to his house. There he is to wash his hands and legs with this water and sprinkle water all over within the house. On his way to his house he should not see any pashandis (men who do not worship Vishnu and who worship only Śiva) nor can he talk to them.

Persons who go to the temple to worship God should avoid the following apacharams i.e., they are not to do the prohibited things. The apachārams are detailed below :-- (I) Those who cause disturbance by loud noise to music, to dancing and to the reading of sacred writings enter into २१ kinds of naraka. Then they are born as donkeys.

(२) Those who pray to God with the upper cloth covering the body will be born three times with white leprosy.

(३) Persons who come to God to pray to Him with woollen clothing on will be born as chandaļas for fourteen janmas.

(४) Men who with oil smeared over them and with their shoes or foot-wear come to pray to God and enter the temple with these are born as dogs for three generations.

[[०८२]]

[[७७]]
(५) Those who throw nails, hair and bones into God's sannidhi are to be born as flies for seven times.

(६) He who spits the betel and nut from his mouth in the precincts within God's temple will be in naraka as long as pancha bhūtas exist.

(७) One who spits in God's temple has to remain in the hall where worms are abundant and he will be born as trees.

(८) One who goes to smaśānam and does pūja to God without bathing, loses the good that he secured during seven births.

(९) A person passing urine in God's temple precincts, falls head downwards into a hell called urinal "mūtra gartam".

(१०) He who passes fæces in the temple of God suffers in २१ narakams and is born as a worm in the fæces.

(II) He who has seen at close quarters of a dead body and comes to the temple without bathing and tries to worship God is sure to be born as a crow.

(१२) He who carries a dead body and enters the temple without bathing is bound to be born as a chandala.

(१३) One who worships God after taking food in nimantraṇam is sure to be born as a sparrow (house sparrow).

(१४) One who stays in the shade of a Vimana except during pradakshina will be born as a thorny tree in an open space.

(१५) He who passes urine or fæces near the temple gets into the hell called "Rau ravādi" naraka.

(१६) Those who talk in God's temple about ordinary matters, and not about God, are sure to be born as "Tittiri" birds.

(१७) Those who take the light away from the presence of God to any other place, are sure to be born as blind people.

(१८) Those who do not care to listen to the words spoken about God's capabilities and who mock at these words are sure to be born either as deaf or dumb people.

(१९) Persons who remain within the temple with their legs stretched and picking out insects from their body and sleep are likely to be born as trees in water-less deserts.

(२०) Those who worship God with flowers that are set apart for other devatās are born as frogs.

(२१) Those who go to the temples of devatās and then come to the temple of God without a bath are likely to be born as beggars going from house to house and yet not securing enough to be happy.

(२२) He who considers God as only a devata and equal to them is born as a Chandala (२३) Those who smell the flowers intended for the worship of God are born as lepers emitting bad smell.

(२४) Persons who are not generally allowed to come near such as Chandaļas, patitas outside a temple, should not be treated as untouchables when they come to pray to God. One should not bathe if they happen to touch them during God's procession.

[[०८३]]
[[७८]]

(२५) Any one suspecting that he is defiled during an utsava and who bathes to get rid of this defilement will fall into Naraka from Swarga with his pitrs.

(२६) After taking Sripada tirtha of Vaishnavas or the tirtha (sacred water) of God achamanam should not be done.

The following are considered sins against God in a temple: so these should be avoidcd as far as possible :- Entering a temple on a vahana or with shoes on his feet; avoiding to see the procession of God during an utsavam; not doing obeisance (praṇāmam) to God on meeting God; saluting God with one hand; turning round and round in the presence of God; prostrating to God while unclean or under pollution; stretching legs in front of God; sitting on a plank in front of God; sleeping, eating, talking secretly, bawling loudly in the temple, crying in the presence of God, fighting before God, abusing one before God, blessing a person in the presence of God; talking to women with evil intention, and talking badly in the presence of God; leaving gas through the anus while in the presence of God; covering one's body with a woollen clothing; abusing or praising others in God's presence; doing only formal things when one is strong; eating things not offered to God; not offering to God fruits grown in the season; offering to God portions of food already used; sitting with the back turned to God; prostrating to men in temples; remaining quiet without talking to his guru in the temple; praising himself; decrying God; insulting a Vaishnava if he touches blood unknowingly and lying down within the temple just as he pleases; talking idly and repeating the Vedas at times not prescribed by the śastras; sitting within the temple on an asana or plank.

Any one who thinks that God is only an idol made of metal and that his Acharya is only a mortal being falls into hell.

Another set of things that are to be avoided in the temple are the following:-- Entering the temple to salute God after eating things that have been prohibited; going near God without cleaning one's teeth; touching God without bathing after cohabitation with women; coming close to God without bathing after seeing a corpse; coming near God without bathing after touching a woman in menses; touching a dead body and coming to salute God directly after burning the corpse and without bathing; while doing pūja to God passing gas through the anus; passing fæces and urine in the temple precints; bawling loudly when worship to God is being performed; saluting and seeing God with a black cloth covering the upper part of his body; saluting God with a single cloth in his waist; doing service to God with anger; offering flowers to God not fit for pūja; worshipping God wearing a cloth coloured red; touching God in the dark; doing service to God without bathing after touching dogs and such other unclean animals; saluting God after eating the flesh of animals; touching God immediately after touching the lamp; coming to God's presence directly from the smaśāna without bathing; saluting God after neglecting the bhagavatās; saluting God with one hand; coming to God's temple for the sake of meeting and bringing strangers; not offering new grains to God; offering to God dhupa only without flowers; rousing God from sleep without sounding the bheri.

[[०८४]]
१९३०]

[[७९]]
## AUPĀSANAM.

The worshipper approaches the fire which he used the previous day, after washing his legs and doing two achamanams. For use he takes fire from this by using darbha or samit and mixes it with fire in the place where he intends doing the ceremony and he repeats the following mantra while burning the samit or the darbha in the fire:-"Upavaroha jātavedah punastvam dēvēbhyo havyam vahanaḥ prajānān āyuḥ prajāmrayimasmāsudhehi ajasrodidihino durone" The meaning of the passage is as follows:-"Oh Agni, again come down to earth from aranai (Ficus religiosa). Knowing well that this havis or offering has been given to the Devas, carry this offering to them.

Give us life, children and wealth. You who are always living shine forth in our houses." If the fire is in the samit he has to repeat the following mantra "Ajuhvanassupratikaḥ purastādagnē svāmyönimāsīdasādhya . asmin sadhaste adhyuttarasmin viśvě- dēvā yajamānaścha sIdata" and do "Avarohanam" (removal) to it. The translation of the above is:-Oh Agni! having been invited with great favour, with grace, reach your own good place in the eastern direction. Oh! Viśvēdēva, you and the sacrificer sit on the best seat provided in front of us, where you can very well sit with Agni. Then he does sankalpam repeating "Śrī Bhagavadājñayā śrīman Narayanaprītyartham prātaraupāsanahomam hoshyāmi" and then repeats the bala mantra as follows:--- "Kritancha karishyāmi prātaraupāsanēna bhagavat karmanā bhagavato balēna." Then he does the satvikatyāga by repeating the following mantra: -"Bhagavānēva prātaraupāsanākhyam karma kārayati." In a place in front of the worshipper where he is sitting he has to draw three lines, west to east, and three lines north to south, with the help of darbhas and then he has to throw the darbhas on the ground, sprinkle water over them and then they are thrown towards the nirrti corner. Then he touches water and pronouncing three times the Vyāhrtis along with the pranavam takes the fire and keeps it in the place where homam is to be done. Afterwards he pours the water down, that was used for sprinkling, either towards the east or north and fills the empty vessel with fresh water and places it either to the north or east of the fire-place. Round the fire-place he places sixteen darbhas, four on each side, beginning with the east and going round in a pradakshina manner, that is to say, four darbhas to the east first with the sharp points or apex of the darbhas towards the north, then on the south with the tips of darbhas to the east, then on the west with the tips towards the north and lastly on the northern side with the tips towards the east. The darbhas placed to the south should be above the darbhas placed towards the east and the west and the darbhas placed towards the north with the tip to the east should be below the darbhas placed towards the west and the east. After placing the darbhas round the fire as described above, he places the hands in a praying posture (hands together with the palms touching) and repeats the following mantra:-- "Chatvari śrnga trayōasyapādā dvēśīrshē sapta hastaso asya . tridhābaddho . vrshabho röravīti mahōdevo martyān avivēśa . eshahi devaḥ pradiśōnu sarvāḥ . pūrvōhi jātaḥ [[०८५]]
[[८०]]

sa u garbhe antah . savijayamanah sajanishyamānaḥ pratyangmuklastisthati viśvato mukhah." Translation of the above passage is :--" The great deity Agni has come down to men and he is attended to by sacrifices. He has four Vedas as his four horns, the three svaras are his three feet, Brahmodana and Pravargya are his two heads, the seven vedic metres are his seven heads; He is regulated by the Mantra, Kalpa and Brahmaṇa; He is the bestower of fortunes. He is sung with and without music with the hymns of the Rg., Yajus and Sama by the sacrificial priests such as Hota. Self-resplendent Paramatma realised by wise men having been present in all quarters was born Hiranyagarbha in the beginning of creation. He is the same Paramatma. He has been born as Devas, beasts, etc., and is going to be born as such hereafter too. He is living in the hearts of all beings, is seeing all and is inciting them to do their action." Then he prays repeating "Prangmukho deva agnē abhimukhō bhava" which in English runs thus "Oh Agni of divine splendour, please be seated in the eastern direction and be disposed friendly towards me". He takes some akshata in the left hand and taking small quantities with the right hand places it in the directions mentioned, beginning with the east and ending with the Isanyam the north-east or the eighth corner. While placing the rice he repeats in order the following mantras beginning with the east:-"Omagnayēnamaḥ.

jāta vēdasē namah. Om sahojasē namah Om ajiraprabhave namah Om Vaiśvānarāya namah Om naryāpasē namah Om panktirathasē namah Om visarpinė namah!" This when rendered into English is "Om salutation to Agni. Om salutation to jatavēdas. Om salutation to sahojas. Om salutation to Ajiraprabhava. Om salutation to Vaiśvānara. Om salutation to Naryāpasa. Om salutation to Panktirathas. Om salutation to Visarpin. " After placing the turmeric dyed rice all round the fire in eight places, he takes some white rice and repeating the following mantra "Om yajñapurushāya namaḥ" puts the rice in fire. Then repeating "Sarvebhyaḥ śrī Vaishnaveybhyo namah" he scatters the akshata close to the bhagavatas on the ground. The above Sanskrit passages mean "Salutation to the all-powerful Lord who is pleased by this sacrifice" and "Salutation to all the Sri Vishnavas." Then he pours water with the hand round the fire repeating "Aditēnu manyasva . anumatēnu manyasva . sarasvatēnu manyasva . deva savitaḥ prasūva." This when rendered into English is as follows:-"Oh Earth, please allow me to get the kingdom. Oh wife of the Deva, who willingly supports all actions, please allow me to attain what I wish. Oh Sarasvati, please allow me to attain what I wish. Oh Sun that impels all beings, incite me to do the Vajapēya sacrifice." After repeating the above he places one samit (piece of palāśa stick) in the fire. Then he takes a handful of rice in the left hand, sprinkles water over it with the right hand and taking half the quantity of rice offers it to Agni through the fingers repeating "Suryaya svaha." Repeating "Suryāyēdam na mama" he takes the remaining quantity of rice from the left hand and repeating the mantra "Om agnaye svishṭakṛtě svāha" offers it to Agni. Afterwards he repeats" Agnaye svishṭa krta idam na mama." This when rendered into English would be "I give this oblation to Svishtakst (Agni). This oblation [[०८६]]
[[८१]]
belongs to Svishtakṛt and it is not mine." If it is evening instead of using the term "Sūrya" "Agnayēsvāha" is used and the rest of the mantra may be repeated as those mantras are common. He puts another samit in the fire.

Followers of Sama veda do not repeat the mantra beginning with "Chatvari srngā." They do parishechanam repeating the mantra "Deva savitaḥ prasuva, yajñam prasuva, yajñapatim bhagaya divyo gandharvah, ketapūḥ kētam nah punātu vāchaspatir vāchām nah svadātu." This in English runs thus :-" Oh Sun lord! Incite me to do the sacrifice.

Make this sacrifice go on without impediment. Incite the sacrificer also so that he may get fortunes. The gandharva that is in swarga cleanses the knowledge that is in the minds of others. Let him cleanse our knowledge so that it may be without confusion.

Let vachaspati correct our words (mantra) used in this act, ie., sacrifice, " Paristaraṇa should be placed east, south, north and west. In the morning while doing homam he says Sūryāya svāhā sūryāya idam na mama, prajāpataye idam na mama" and in the evening repeats the following while doing homam:-"Agnaye svaha agnaye idam na mama prajāpatayēsvāhā prajapataya idam na mama." This means "I give the oblation to Agni.

This oblation is for Agni and it is not mine. I give the oblation to Prajapati This oblation is for Prajapati and it is not mine." Then in the morning he repeats "Yadindra ham yathā tvam"sāmam. In the evening he recites "Yadindra haim yathauhau hövahāyi" samam. This in English runs thus "Just as Indra is the lord of wealth amongst the Devas so I should also become the lord of wealth." Afterwards he repeats Vamadevyam and śāntijapa.

६"
The ahutis put in fire should not touch one another. If they should mix he does sankalpam as follows:-" Ahuti samsarga prāyaśchittārtham vanaspatihōmam karishye." This means "To expiate the sin arising out of the mixing of offered oblations in the sacrificial fire I am doing the vanaspati homa." He places one samit in fire repeating "Yatra vettha vanaspatē dēvānām guhyā nāmāni tatra havyāni gamaya svaha." This passage when rendered into English runs "Oh Vanaspati, you know the places where the secret names of the Devas are well known, hence make my oblations reach those places." After putting the samit in the fire he repeats:---" Vanaspataya idam na mama This means "This oblation is offered to Vanaspati and it is not mine." Then the mantra:--"Om aditenvamagam sthah . Om anumatenvamagmsthah . Om sarasvatēnvamagmsthāḥ . dēva savitaḥ prāsāvih" is repeated.

"
This in English runs as follows:-"Oh Earth! you have allowed me to get the kingdom. Oh wife of the Deva, willingly supporting all actions, you have permitted me to attain what I wished. Om oh Sarasvati! you have permitted me to attain what I wished. Oh Sun that impels all beings! you have incited me to do the Vajapeya sacrifice." Sama Vedis should recite the mantra beginning with "savitaḥ prāsāvih yajñam prāsāvīḥ . " and ending with "Ketam napavit Vachaspatir vacham no svadīt." This when translated runs as follows:-Oh Sun that impels all beings! You have incited me to do the Vajapēya sacrifice. You have helped me in doing the Vajapeya sacrifice.

"The gandharva who is in the devaloka perfects the knowledge of men, may he perfect II
[[०८७]]
[[८२]]

our knowledge of this Vajapeya sacrifice. May Vachaspati make us recite properly the mantras that are uttered by us in this sacrifice." The fire is then sprinkled with water.

This is followed by the placing of a samit or two darbhas into the fire and repeating.

"Śrī Vishnave svaha, Śri Vishnave paramatmane idam na mama." This means "Om I offer this oblation to Śri Vishnu. This oblation is for Śrī Vishnu the supreme Lord of all and it is not mine." As soon as the rice put in fire is burnt he gets up and with palms placed together and lifting them in a prayerful posture repeats the following:-- "Agnēnaya supathā rāyē asmān viśvāni dēva vayunāni vidvan . yuyodhyasmajjuhurāṇa mēnō bhayishtham te nama uktim vidhēma." This when rendered into English runs thus:-"Oh shining Agni you possess all kinds of knowledge and therefore you are wise; lead us in a good way to the wealth of swarga which we should attain. Therefore keep us away from the crooked sins which stand in the way of attaining our desires. We make huge praise of you." If the performer is a Sama Vedi he recites "Namastau högnāyi." This means "Oh Agni, I praise you." The performer repeats the mantra "Om Agnaye namah . mantra hinam kriyā hīnam bhakti hinam hutāśana yaddhutamtu maya deva paripūrnam tadastute prāyaśchittanyāśeshani tapaḥ karmātmakānīvai . yanitēshāmaśēshānām krshnānusmaranam param." This in English runs thus :-" Om salutation to Agni. Oh resplendent Deva ! Let the offering or oblation given to you by me be a complete one though there may be deficiency in the mantras uttered, in the actions done, and in the devotion in the spirit it was offered.

Of all the expiatory acts either in the form of penance or action, etc., the repeated recollection of Krshna is the best." After repeating the above mantra he repeats "Śri Krshnava namah", prostrates, and does abhivadanam (repeating his gōtra, pravara and name). Then by repeating "Bhagavānēva prātaraupāsanākhyam karma kāritavan" he does satvikatyāgam The above passage when rendered into English runs thus:-"God himself has done the act, viz., the morning aupasana for his own pleasure, etc.

"
The morning aupāsana ceremony is concluded by repeating "Krtamcha karishyāmi prataraupāsanēna Vasudevah." This when translated runs thsu:-"I am doing what has been already done. May the divine Lord Vasudeva become pleased by this morning aupāsana." Then he utters "yate agnē yajñiyātanūstayōhyārōhātmātmānam accha vasuni krnvan nasme narya purūṇi yajñō bhūtvā yajñamāsīda svām yōnim jātavědō bhuva ajāyamānaḥ sakshaya ehi." This rendered into English runs thus:-' Oh Agni! Come to me in the form suitable to sacrifices. Having come get over me being pleased to give us a large quantity of wealth which is useful to man. Having taken the form of yajña, get into my body, which is your own place and which is doing this yajña or sacrifice. Oh Agni! having been born in front of me from the earth, come to me along with your own house to dwell in me." [[०८८]]
[[८३]]
After uttering the above he places the darbha pavitra over the right ear, heats the palm by taking it near the fire and then does "Ātma samārōpaṇam." ABHIGAMANA ĀRĀDHANAM.

The worshipper, before entering the temple, wears flowers, sandal and clothing, cleanses his mouth by means of water after chewing betel-leaf and nuts and cleans his hands and feet. As soon as he enters the temple, he stands at a distance and prostrates before God. Getting up and with the permission of the two dvārapālakās he enters the temple precincts to near God and while doing so he repeats the following :—“ Kausalya suprajā Rāma Pūrvāsandhya pravartate ūttishtha naraśārdūla kartavyam daivāmahnikam Vīra saumya vibuddhyāswa kausalyānandavardhana jagaddhi sarvam svapititvayi supte parantapa॥ Yāminyapaiti yadunātha vimuncha nidrām unmeśhaṁṛcchati tavōnmīshitē na viśvam . jātasvyaṁ khalu jagaddhitamēva kartum dharmapravartana dhiyā dharaṇītalesmin." This when translated runs thus:----"Oh Rama! Kausalya is very fortunate in having a good son. The morning twilight is dawning in the East.

Rise up, Oh tiger among men. The divine daily routine has to be gone through Oh Hero of benign qualities and who increases the happiness of Kausalya, wake up. Oh destroyer of foes, when you sleep the whole world will go to sleep. Oh Lord of Yadu! the night is gone, wake up from your sleep. The whole universe wakes up when you wake up. You are indeed born yourself in this world with the intention of spreading dharma in order to do good to the whole world." Instead of this other ślōkas which rouse God may be repeated. Then he does ārādhana offering tulasī flowers and fruits. He prostrates freely on the floor with bhakti and stands with the hands in a prayerful posture.

While thus standing he repeats the dvaya mantra and then recites the gadya in which the meanings of dvaya are included. Then he prays to God that all things that have to be done should be properly performed and ended well and does śaraṇagati. In the end he looks at auspicious things such as mirror, etc. Afterwards repeating "Saurabheyāś- sarvahitaḥ pavitraḥ punyarāśayaḥ . pratigr̥hṇantvimam grāsaṁ gāvastrailokya mataraḥ ॥" he gives a handful of grass to the cow of others. The above passage when translated into English runs thus:--" Let the cows accept the handful of grass, the cows who are the mothers of the three worlds, who have descended from Surabhi or Kamadhēnu, who are good to all, who are pure and who are a heap of virtue." Afterwards obeisance is to be done to Āchāryas and other elderly men.

If one is not able to do "Abhigamanam" as stated above he may do obeisance to his Āchārya and do bharanyāsam. If he is unable to do even this, then he may repeat "Tirumantra" and think of God. If he is under any pollution he must think of these things in his mind. He should not repeat the usual things then, but he may repeat ordinary Tamil verses or Sanskrit ślōkas other than the above and think of God. From a distance he has to do añjali to God.

Towards the end he repeats the following:--" Bhagavānēva Kṛtancha abhigamakhyam kartāvan" and does sātvikatyāgaṁ and then concludes as follows :- “ ābhigamanēna Vasudēvaḥ ॥." II-A [[०८९]]
[[८४]]

G.S:, UPĀDĀNAM.

During the second yamam he does sankalpa repeating "Krtancha upādānena archayishyāmi." Then he repeats the Balamantra "Bhagavānēva upādānākhyam kārayati" and does satvikatyagam. The person who wants to perform this part of the ceremony is expected to secure flowers, fruits, and other things needed for the worship of God. Only flowers that are clean and found on plants growing in clean situations and those accepted as fit by older Acharyas are to be secured for use. Flowers having good smell, and are beautiful to look at, ghee, milk and curds are to be secured for use. They are to be cleaned properly and kept for use Flowers that are grown by the activity of a person are superior. Those flowers that are secured from plants growing in a wild state are not very good and they have only a medium value. Those purchased in the bazaar are about the worst in value. Flowers secured stealthily or by begging are very bad. Flowers white in colour belong to the class satvika. Red flowers are put under rājasa and blue and black belong to the tamasa class. One should avoid flowers growing on plants found in unclean places; those flowers that are faded, those that are not full, unripe buds, old flowers are also to be avoided; flowers used by any body, flowers smelt, flowers touched by unclean animals, flowers with worms in them are also to be avoided. Flowers of oleander should never be used in houses for God's archana.

All flowers should be secured by repeating "Vīryāya astrayaphat." The leaves of the plants, Achyranthes aspera, Ocimum sanctum, the Bael tree, Ficus religiosa, black tulasi, and vanhi tree may be secured for use. Water flowers such as lotus cannot be accepted two days after plucking. For dhupam the wood of sandal, dēvadaru and ahil are to be used. Things obtained from animals should not be used. But kastūri and gōrōjana, though obtained from animals, may be used for God. With the exception of red lotus, red "Sengashanir," red flowers should not be used for doing puja to God. Flowers and other things meant for the use of God should never be obtained from women of illfame, a wicked fellow who is doing things against caste, a napumsaka and from one who hates God. Things should not be brought and used from any house where no bhagavadarādhana is performed.

Repeating "Samidhaḥ pāvanaḥ pūjyāścharmayuktaḥ paruṭ parah . yushman harami hömārtham asmān rakshantu sarvada" he secures samit-sticks of Butea frondosa. This means "Oh palāsa sticks, you are pure, worthy of adoration, causing happiness to others, endowed with knots. I cut you for the sake of offering to Agni. Protect us always." Darbha is secured by repeating the mantra that follows:--"Virinchena sahotpanna parameshthiparigraha . nuda sarvāṇi pāpāni dharbha svastikaro mama (bhava)." This passage when rendered into English runs thus:---"Born along with Brahma, accepted of him, oh Darbha, remove all (my) sins and give me peace and happiness." Tulasi (sacred basil) is secured by plucking small pieces, so that each may have four leaves and all round young bud of leaves in the centre. While plucking the tulasi the following mantra is repeated:-"Tulasyamſta janmāsi sadātvam kēśavapriyē kēśavārtham lunamitvan varadā bhava śobhane . mokshaikahētōh dharaniprasūtē vishṇossamastasya guroh [[०९०]]
[[८५]]
priyētā ārādhanārtham purushottamasya lūnami patram tuļasi kshamasva." This when translated means:-" Oh Tulasi! you have been born from nectar. You are always fond of Keśava or Vishnu. I cut you for the sake of Kesava. Oh brilliant one! be a granter of boons. Oh one born from Earth! you are very dear to Vishnu who is the perceptor for all, and through Whom only one can attain moksha or release from bondage. I cut your leaf for the propitiation of purushottama. Oh Tulasi forgive me." Tulasi should not be plucked on Sundays, Fridays, New Year Days at any time, in the afternoons, nights, evening times and on Sankaraṇti days every month. New moon day, fullmoon day, dvādaśi are also days on which the plant should not be touched on any account. If secured, it must be considered tantamount to plucking God's head from the body. For use on these prohibited days, tulasi secured the previous day should be used.

When money or other substances are received for aradhana of God both the giver and receiver repeat" Achyutaḥ priyatām." For the worshipper of God, mercy to all livingbeings including man, keeping completely under control one's indriyas, mercy without himsa to all living creatures, patience, knowledge, contemplation and truthfulness are essential features to be possessed. These qualities are essential for every one who worships God and so a worshipper should do his best to increase the possessions of these characteristics by association with good acharyas, talking and associating with them and reading good sacred books during the "Upādānakala." Those who are not required to secure all these things during the time may spend their time by reading and listening to good things only. In case one has to do aradhana soon on special occasions, he may shorten the ceremonies abhigamanam and upādānam. Then he may do the satvikatyāgam and pray to God.

## MADHYAHNIKA SNĀNAM.

For this snānam also some mantras are repeated as for bathing in the morning.

Just before the bath he repeats the following:-" Avāhayāmi tvām devi snānārthamiha sundari ehigange namastubhyam sarvatirthasamanvite." This when translated runs thus:-" Oh beautiful Goddess! I invite you here for my bathing Oh Ganga! salutation to thee, who possess all the sacred waters of the world." The usual sankalpa, bala mantra and satvikatyāga mantra are repeated before the above mantra. Repeating the above āvāhana mantra he takes water in both his hands and invokes Ganga to come over there. Then arghyam is given repeating "Vishnu vāmā padāngushtha nakhaśrōtō vinisrute . tadbhakti vighna rūpāt tvam gange mam mochayainasah ॥." This in English runs thus:-" Oh Ganga that came out from the nail of the left great toe of Vishnu! Please release me from the sins which stand as obstacles to his devotions." He then bathes for the midday as for the morning and dresses himself as usual after the bath.

Urdhvapingam, etc., are put on the face and various parts of the body.

## MADHYAHNIKAM.

He does achamanams as for the morning Sandhya Vandanam, but in the Sankalpam instead of "Pratassandhyām" he has to say "Madhyāhnika sandhyām." After [[०९१]]
[[८६]]

pranayamam he repeats the following:--" Apahpunantvityanuvākasya aparshiḥ anushtup cchandah brahmanaspatirdēvata . apām praśanë viniyogah." Translation:--For the anuvāka "Apahpunantu" Āpas are Rshi, and Anushtup is chandas and the Devata is Brahmanaspati." Then taking water in the right hand he repeats "Apahpunantu prithivim prithivi pūtā punātumām, punantu brahmanaspatih brahmaputa punatumam, yaducchishtam abhojyam yadva duscharitam mama . sarvam punantumāmāpah astamcha pratigraham svāhā" and drinks it.

Translation: "Let waters purify the earth; let the world (earth) which is purified make me pure; Narayana who is superior (the master of) to the Chaturmukha, let him purify water; let waters purified by Paramatma purify me; let the waters remove the evils and purify me who by eating the remains that should not be eaten have become consequently a sinner and who has received sins from bad people.

"
Afterwards all the mantras are the same as in the morning Sandhya Vandanam.

The "Arghyam" is given twice instead of thrice In the case of japam also mantras are similar to those which were used in the morning up to upasthanam After upasthanam the following mantra is repeated:- Āsatyēnēti shadrchasya hiranyastūpa rshih . adyayoh trishtup chatasrṇam gāyatri jagatyushniktristubhah cchandamsi . savita devatā mādhyāhnika sandhyōpasthāne viniyogah." Translation:--Āsatyēna form six riks, Rshi is Hiranyastupa, Cchandas are trishtup, trishṭup gāyatrī, jagati trishtup and anushtup; savītā is the Devata." Then he repeats the following mantra: "Asatyēna rajasavartamānō nivēsayan amrtam martyamcha, hiranyayena savita rathēnā dēvōyati bhuvanavipaśyan . udvayam tamasaspari paśyantōjyotiruttaram . dēvam dēvatrā sūryam aganmajyotiruttamam ! udutyam jātavēdasam dēvam vahantikētavah driśē viśvāyasūryam . chitram devanamudagadanikam chakshur mitrasya Varuṇasyāgneh . aprādyāva prithivi antariksham sūryaātmā jagatastasthushaścha . tat chakshurdēvahitam purastat śukra muccharat paśyēma śaradasśatam . jīvēma śaradaśśatam . nandāma śaradaśśatam . modama śaradaśśatam . bhavāma śaradaśśatam . śrnavāma śaradaśśatam . prabravāma śaradas- śatam ajītāsyāma śaradaśśatam . jyokchasūryam driśe ya udagan mahatörṇavat vibhrājamānassarirasya madhyāt sama vrshabhlohitakshāḥ sūryo vipaśchinmanasā- punātu." Translation:-"Sun, the deva enveloped in glory and shining in good places, moves in his golden car seeing the doings (Karmas, of every human being as a witness and also influencing the devatās and men to do their duties. We, who see the sun that destroys darkness that is full of effulgent light, that is a good devata, that is an excellent being and one that protects devatās, shall obtain superior brilliance or tējas. The devata who knows all the karmas that are done and who is well known as the sun bears one thousand rays to enable men to see him. There arose the mandala which is a wonderful sight to devatās and which is like an eye to the devatās mitra, varuṇa and agni. The [[०९२]]
[[८७]]
sun existing in that mandalam is the soul of the living and he is permeating the sky, earth and svarga. We shall see for a hundred years the mandalam which is good to devatās, which is like an eye to them, which is white at sunrise and which rises early.

(This means that we shall worship all our lifetime.) May we live a hundred years; may we have sons and grand children; may we be happy; may we become prosperous in our own place; may we hear only speech that is dear to us; may we speak only dear and good words; may we not be overcome by our enemies; we pray that we may see the sun that is shining forth. Let me be protected with proper support by that sun who has arisen from the big ocean, who shines in the midst of water, who grants the wishes of everyone, who is red in colour and who knows everything." Then the person is expected to do the Japa of ashṭakshara and then Vastranishpidanam, etc.

## ARĀDHANAM OR WORSHIP.

The person who intends to do worship to God, at first attends to his personal cleanliness. He cleans his feet and hands and then selects a suitable place for him.

This place is cleaned by repeating the sōshaṇa, dahana and plavana mantras. Sitting on the place thus selected he meditates on the parampara of his gurus and God. He is to think that the end and aim of his is only to attain God's presence and the only way to attain Him is His grace. He should also think that God is the only person who can remove unpleasant things and think of the svarupa, rūpa, character and vibhūtis of God. He should try to approach God's feet by repeating the stotra ślokās beginning with "Akhilahēyapratyanika." After attaining the feet of God and with mind strengthened by his favour, he should think of God only as one dear to him and as one whom he is always thinking as being before him. Then with the grace arising from such a devotion he is to begin the worship of God. Repeating "Bhagavānēva upakramatē" he does nyasam with panchopanishad mantras in samhāra order and then does one pranayamam. With his right hand he touches his navel repeating the mūla mantra and afterwards says "Mantrōdbhūta chanda vāyvāpyayita nābhi dēśastha vayunā śarīramantarbahischa tatvakramena śōshayāmi." This in English is as follows:---"I dry up the body both internally and externally in the order of tatvas by which it is constituted, by the wind situated in the navel being spread up by the chandra vayu proceeding from the mantra uttered." After repeating the above mantra he thinks that his whole body has been dried up (soshanam).

Again he does pranayamam and with his right hand he touches his heart repeating the mūla mantra and then repeats the following mantra - "Mantrōdbhūta chakrāgni jvālōpa brhmita jātharagninā tattat samashti pralina sarvatatva sarva kilbisha sarvājñāna tad vāsanam śarīram dahayāmi." This when translated runs thus :-"I burn the body with the several tatvas, all sins, all ignorance together with vasana, so that the several tatvas may merge in the samashṭi śrshti by the fire in the abdomen spread up by the flames of the Jatharagni proceeding from the mantra uttered." After repeating the above he thinks that his whole body was burnt and he should place his soul so as to rest below the thumb of the right foot of God. Then doing another pranayamam he imagines that by [[०९३]]
[[८८]]

God's grace he has become an object fit to do service to God and then he thinks that his soul has come out from the foot of God. He is expected to think that he is standing below the toe of the feet of God, that water in the form of amrta flowing from the feet of God is washing him and that he has secured his body capable of doing service of every kind to God. Finally he should do nyasa on his body repeating the panchopanishad mantras in the order of creation. He should then touch his head repeating "Om shaum namahparaya parameshthyatmane;" touch his nose repeating "Om yam namahpataya purushatmane," touch his chest repeating "Om ram namahparaya visvatmane" and touch his guhya repeating "Om vam namahparaya nivrityatmane" and touch his legs repeating "Om lam namahparaya sarvatmane." (The meaning can be learnt only by Upadesa!)

He is to imagine that he has obtained his body according to the saktis He does another pranayāma and thinks that he has bathed in the water of Ganges flowing from God's toe and then puts on the twelve namams and begins the aradhanam of God.

Then he does satvikatyaga repeating "Bhagavaneva upakramate" and then does hrittyāgam as usual. Then he has to place on his right side all the materials required for worshipping God and on his left side the "Tirukkaveri" vessel filled with water. Taking flowers, sandal paste in his hand he repeats the ashtakshara seven times, does soshaṇa, dahana and plavana to these materials. Next he repeats again the astramantra and waves his hand all round the eight directions. He places on his right side all the other materials needed for worship and in his front in a seat he places the arghya, padya, achamaniya and snaniya vessels. Afterwards he cleans them by repeating the astramantra, does soshaṇa, dahana and plavana and then he fills these vessels with some water. Into the vessel containing arghya water he puts in siddhartakam, sandal paste, flowers, top pieces of darbha grass and rice grains (akshatai). He places into the padya vessel cynodon grass, Evolvulus alsinoides (Vishnu kranthem), syāmākam, padmākam, etc. He puts into the achamaniya vessel cardamoms, cloves, takkolam, khuskhus, and flowers. Into the snaniya vessel he puts turmeric, kastūrimanjal, murai, saileyam, takkolam, jatamanji, sandal paste and flower buds of Michelia Champaca. The vessel placed in the centre contains water and it is generally called "Sarvarthātoyām." Then touching the arghya patra with his right hand he repeats the mula mantra and then repeats the mantra "Om namo bhagavate arghyam parikalpayami" (I am preparing the arghya for God). In the same manner he touches the other vessels repeating the mula mantra and then repeats the mantra "Om namo bhagavate padyam parikalpayami." All the five vessels he touches repeating the mula mantra and repeats the above mantra "Om achamaniyam etc, only altering the name of the vessel.

Taking water in an uddharani (spoon) from the arghya vessel he sprinkles it over the place where the aradhana is to be done, over the vessels to be used during the worship (or aradhana) and over himself separately.

In places where the above described "Adharashaktyadiipitha" is not established God is requested to come for aradhana from paramapada (heaven), milk-ocean, sun, heart, [[०९४]]
Mathura, Dvāraka, Ayodhya and Srirangam. The worshipper should imagine that God is associated with his wives, ornaments, arms, and with dvārapālakas and other men.

He should think of God as possessing three kinds of chetana and achetana things with their svarupa (form) sthiti (existence) and pravitti (permeation) as being under His control. God is not touched by karma or thoughts about these things. The worshipper should also think that the characteristics, knowledge (Jñānam), power (balam), wealth (aiśvaryam), boldness (vīryam), strength (sakti) and light (tejas) are possessed by God. The worshipper should think of God as above described, and offer himself to God by repeating the ashtakshara. Then he should begin the regular worshipping ceremony.

From the "Arghyapatra" (arghya vessel) he takes some water by means of the uddha.

rani (spoon) and lifting this with both the hands up to the nose of God repeats with due respect, "Bhagavannidam pratigrhnishva." (Oh God kindly receive this). During this time the worshipper thinks of God and taking the water close to God's face and offering it pours some wateron God's hands and then he pours the remaining water into the arghya or arghya pratigraha patra. Then cleaning his hands he places flowers at the feet of God and with a spoon takes water from the padya vessel and sprinkles it over the feet of God and thinks that he has washed the feet of God and pours the remaining water into the "Padya pratigrahapatra" (vessel intended to receive the water taken out of a padya vessel). Then cleaning his hands with a clean cloth folded he removes water from the feet of God by wiping them with the folded cloth and then offers to God sandal paste and flowers Next he takes water from the achamanīya vessel by means of the uddharani (spoon) and pours it in the right hand of God and imagines that God has done the achamanam. The remaining water in the uddharani (spoon) is poured into the achamana pratigrahapatra (vessel intended to receive the water taken out of the achamana vessel). Then sandal paste, flowers, incense, light, achamanam, betel leaves and nuts are offered. When prostrating before God he prays that God should accept him and everything near Him as objects fit for service. He also repeats "Ātmānam ātmiyam cha sarvam bhagavān nityakinkarataya svīkuru" while praying.

The translation of the above passage is as follows:-"Oh God, kindly accept me and all belonging to me as worthy of your service always." Then he offers to God Snanāsana.

He places sandal paste and flowers over the asana and decorates it. He then prostrates before God and then with God's permission offers to Him the sandals (padukais of wood)

and requests God to occupy the asanam (snanāsanam). While in snānāsanam cloths, ornaments and garlands worn by God are removed and these are handed over to Vishvaksēna who is close by. Then the worshipper offers to God the Snana Satika (cloth for bath) and afterwards the following things in order, viz, arghya, padya, achamanīya, pādapītham (plank for the feet), dantakashtam, (toothbrush) jihvānirlēkhanam (tongue scraper), gandūsham (mouthful of water for rinsing), mukhaprakshaļanam (cleaning the face), achamanam (sipping water three times), ādarśa pradarśanam (showing of mirror), hastaprakshalanam (cleaning of the hands), mukhavāsatāmbūlam (betel leaves, etc., for beautifying the face), tailabhyanganam (smearing oil to some part of the body), udvartanam (rubbing and cleaning the body with fragrant unguents)

[[१२]]
[[०९५]]
[[९०]]

amalakatoyam (washing with water containing the essence of Phyllanthus emblica), kankajam (haircomb), plota dehaśodhana satika (cloth for drying up the water on the body), haridralepanam (turmeric unguent) prakshalanam (washing), vastram (cloth).

uttariyam (upper cloth), yajñōpavītam (sacred thread), padyam (water for washing feet), achamanam (water sipping), pavitram (darbha grass) twisted for putting on the ४th finger, gandham (sandal paste), pushpam (flowers), dhūpadipams (redhot fire and light), achamanam (water sipping), dehaśodhanam (cleaning the body), vastram (cloth), uttariyam (upper cloth) yajñopavītam (sacred thread) and achamanam (sipping of water)

Next the Alankarāsana is worshipped by puja and God is requested to occupy this pitha by prostrating before him. Then taking God's permission the wooden shoes (padukais) are presented to him. After God has occupied the seat presented to Him, he prepares as before and presents to him arghyam, padyam, achamaniyam and sarvārtha toyam. Arghya, padya, achamaniya and the sandal paste, flowers and padasammardanam (pressing of feet), vastra (cloth), uttariyam (upper cloth), ornaments, sacred thread and achamaniyam are also presented to Him. For the other attendants of God snānam (bath), vastram (cloth) and bhūshanams (ornaments) are given and sandal paste, etc., are served to them after offering them to God. Further, for the parivārās (servants) of God sandal paste alone is to be offered. (Arghyam,padyam and achamanIyam need not be offered). He does the various upacharas to God by offering sandal paste, flowers, alankaras, ūrdhvapundrams, anjanam, ādarśam, frankincense, light, achamanam, dhvajam, umbrella, chamaram, vahanam, śankam, chihnam, kāhaļi, bhers with dancing, songs and vadyas.

Repeating the "Ashtakshara" he offers flowers for every syllable or letter. Similarly he repeats the dvādaśakshara, the shadakshara, Vishnu gāyatri, panchopanishanmantras and purushasūktam and offers as many flowers as he can. For the devi (Goddess) he does the same pūjās repeating the appropriate mantras. He does praṇāmams for the four corners and does pradakshina and offers flowers. After doing praṇāmam in the front he repeats some stotras that are pleasant to the ear.

Then he should pray to God to accept him as His daily devotee and do the "Ashtakshara japa" according to his capacity.

Then he offers tirtha to God as if finishing everything to be done to God. He next offers mukhavāsa tāmbulam, arghya and Bhoōjyāsanam.

He does pūja to the Bhojyāsanam, does pranamam to God and with God's permission offers the wooden sandals (padukais). Then imagining that God has occupied this seat, he offers to God padyam, achamaniyam and arghya and afterwards Madhuparkam is offered; that is to say jaggery, honey, ghee, curds and milk are secured and kept separately, after subjecting these to the usual sōshaṇa, dahana and plavana processes arghya water is sprinkled over these articles and then these articles are offered to God. Then if available a cow, gold, precious stones such as diamonds, etc., and grain are sprinkled with water and they are offered to God by placing them before Him. Then food that is properly and cleanly prepared (cooked rice), ghee, curds, milk, honey, fruits and roots of [[०९६]]
sorts are placed before God and are sprinkled with arghya water. Digbandhanam is done by repeating the "Astra" mantra and "Surabhi" mudra is shown. Then arghya tirtham is taken saying the mantra "Atiprabhūtam idam svikuru." This when translated runs thus :-" Kindly accept the food, etc., which are prepared in large quantity, with the greatest affection, with all its completeness and with the greatest heart-felt devotion." He does pranamam and with bent head prays to God and requests him to make use of the things offered to Him. Afterwards he should offer to God anupānam, tarpaṇam at first and then hastaprakshalanam, achamanam, hastasammārjanam, sandalwood paste, and mukha vāsa tambūlam.

Then he does pranamam to God and cleans the mantrāsana and requests God to occupy this, after taking his permission and after cleaning and doing puja to the asana. He offers the padukais to God. As soon as God occupies the seat, he removes from His body the sandal paste, garlands, etc, and hands them over to Vishvaksena. Afterwards he offers to God padya, achamantya, sandal paste, flowers, dhūpa (smoke of incense), light, achamana, bhakshyam, fruits, and achamanlyam. He goes round Him twice (two pradakshinas) and prostrates before Him.

Then he cleans the paryankasana (seat intended for bedding) and after getting God's permission offers Him the new seat. While He is in the new seat he offers him the padukais (wooden sandals). He presents to God the usual padyam, achamaniyam, and then takes over from God His garlands, ornaments and cloth and hands them over to Vishvaksena. Next he offers to God soft clothing, ornaments, garlands, upavītam (sacred thread)

and water for achamanam. Lastly he offers sandal paste, flowers, light, dhūpam, achamanīyam and mukhavāsa tāmbūlam. Afterwards he repeats the mantra "Svaniyāmya prativāditavan." The meaning of this passage is as follows:-"God himself for his own sake, for his own pleasure has brought into being all auspicious materials, intended for honour, bodily pleasure, eating and all other things, with all attendants and paraphernalia, which are his own and which are in large numbers, very dear to heart, which are in entirety and which are full of devotion, collected by my body, senses, etc, which are given by him alone and belonging to me whose body, existence and action are entirely governed by him and who is his sole servant and performs the satvikatyāga." He gets permission from God to take a small portion from the things offered to Him for Vishvaksēna and the remainder to offer to his Acharya and other Vaishnavas. The person doing aradhana to God now does pūja to Vishvaksēna and offers to him the things he has set apart for this purpose. Finally he prostrates before God and does to God śaranagati. He is expected to prostrate properly and do the saranagati in the proper form.

Out of the offerings made to God a part is taken and kept separately for Vishvaksēna and the remaining part is divided into three parts-one for himself, one for those who do service to God and one part for Acharyas and Vaishnavas. The part offered to Vishvaksēna is put in water. Then the worshipper praying to God and dvārapalakas finishes the pūja. Next he begins to repeat some slokas from Deśika's work if he is a Vadagalai Sri Vaishnava after repeating some Tamil pasurams (stanzas) from Tiruvaimozhi. When the worshipper is a Tengalai Sri Vaishnava he omits Deśika's stotras and repeats only १२-A [[०९७]]
[[९२]]

the Tamil Tiruvaimozhi Sacred water is distributed to those present and while doing this Deśika's stotrapathas are repeated amongst the Vadagalais.

## VAISVADĒVAM

This ceremony is usually done only by the very orthodox people. Persons who do this ceremony make use of the food taken by them from the food offered to God during the aradhanam of God and towards the end of the ceremony. The performer cleans his feet, does two achamanams and a pranayamam. Then he begins this ceremony of Vaisvadēvam by repeating "Śri bhagavadājñayā śrimannārāyanaprītyartham pratar Vārśvadēvam karishye. He then repeats "Krtancha karishyāmi" and says "Prātar vaiśvadēvēna bhagavatkarmanā bhagavantam Vasudevamarchayishyāmi." After this he continues to repeat "Bhagavato balena" and then does satvikatyāgam by repeating "Bhagavānēva prātar vaisvadēvākhyam karma kārayati" He makes use of agni in the pit which is either aupasanāgni or agni which was used for cooking the food. After putting the fire in the pit he draws lines and does agni pratishthai and paristaranam as is usually done for aupasanam. His wife brings food cooked by her and set apart for vaiśvadēvam and gives it to him saying "Bhūtam." Saying "Tatsubhūtam Viradannam tanmā kshāyi" he takes the food and shows it to fire. The above when translated runs thus:-"The food is well completed and well embellished. Therefore it will not perish." He takes the food and shows it to fire.

Then he places this food to the left and sprinkling water over it, divides it into two parts, one towards the south and the other towards the north. Then in the part of the food in the north he divides the food into three parts by drawing lines east to west.

After thus separating the food, he sprinkles water round the fire saying "Om adite savitaḥ prasūva" and places in the fire one stick. He then takes out from the food a small quantity (about the size of the fruit of "Nellikai") from the south-eastern part and touching with his left hand the vessel in which food is kept, he places this food in fire. Homam ought to be done according to the upadeśa the worshipper has received--that is to say--either Chakrakāram method or Vyajanakāram method.

## PANCHAMAHĀYAJÑAM.

Immediately after Vaiśvadeva the person performs this ceremonial, Panchamahayajñam. He begins this ceremonial by doing "śrotrachamanam" and prāṇāyāmam in the usual way. Then he does sankalpam repeating "Śrībhagavadājñaya dēva yajñēna yakshye." Taking water he washes his left hand repeating "Vidyudasi" and then repeating "Aditēnu manyasva prasūva " does pariṣechanaṁ to agni (i.e., take round water) and puts in fire a samit or darbha. After this he takes the food from the part in the east which is marked off as the northern part, and repeating “Om dēvēbhyasvaha" puts in the fire, and then repeats " Devebhya idam na mama" and places in the fire a darbha. Then once again he pours water round the fire repeating during the process "Om aditēnu prāsāvih" and smears the hands repeating "Vrshtirasi." The meanings of the above Sanskrit passages are given here seriatim :--"This food is [[०९८]]
[[९३]]
offered to the devas. This offering belongs to the Devas and it is not mine or it does not belong to me. You are the cause of cutting." Again he does śrotrachamanam and wearing the yajñopavita with the left hand through it and the string on the right shoulder (i.e., prāchinviti) repeats "Śrībhagavadajñayā . . pitṛ yajñēna yakshye" doing sankalpam. He smears the hands repeating "Vidyudasi." The above Sanskrit when rendered into English run thus:-"I make the sacrifice by pitṛ yajña. You are the cause of separation". He pours water and smears the earth to the south of the fire pit and takes a small quantity of food from the cup again and repeating 'Om pitṛbhyassvadha" places his hand on the ground Then repeating "Pitṛbhya idam na mama" he pours water in the apradakshiṇa way round the fire and cleans his hands by wiping while repeating "Vṛṣṭirasi." The meaning of the Sanskrit in the above runs thus: "I offer this ball of rice to Pitṛs. This offering belongs to Pitṛs and it does not belong to me. You are the cause of cutting." Putting the yajñopavīta in the right way he does śrotrachamanam and prāṇāyāmam.

Then he does sankalpam repeating "Śrī bhagavadājñayā . . bhūta yajñēna yakshye." Repeating "Vidyudasi" (you are the cause of separation) he cleans his hands by smearing. He cleans the earth to the west of agra dana and takes from the cooked rice already used a small quantity of food and saying "Om bhūtebhyo balim harāmi" (I offer a ball of rice to all created beings) places it on the ground. Then he does pariśēchanam to it saying "Om bhūtebhya idam na mama" (this offering is for all created beings and it does not belong to me) and smears his hands repeating "Vṛṣṭirasi" (you are the cause of cutting).

Again he does śrotrachamanam and then prāṇāyāmam. Afterwards he does sankalpam repeating "Śrī bhagavadājñayā . . manuṣya yajñēna yakshye." Then saying "Vidyudasi" (you are the cause of separation) he takes from the central portion of the food some quantity of food (annam) and places it between agrādana and bhūtabali saying "Manuṣyēbhyohanta" and doing pariśēchanam. Then he cleans his hands by wiping and at the same time repeating "Vṛṣṭirasi".

Then he does śrotrachamanam and repeating "Om Śrī Viṣṇavē svāhā" puts in fire a darbha and then says "Om Śrī Viṣṇavē idam na mama." Then he gets up and repeats the mantra beginning "Agne naya" then does praṇāmam after repeating "Agnaye namaḥ param" and then abhivādanam. The balis offered to pitṛs and devas are placed aside and the remaining part is retained and in it put in the other balis. The food used in agra danana and manuṣya yajña is taken and mixed with that part used for atithis.

He does achamanam and repeating "Bhagavānēva . . . . . prātar Vaiśvadevākhyam karma . . . . . . kāritavān" the sātvika tyāga is done. Finally he repeats "Kṛtañcha . . Vāsudevaḥ" Then the sacred water of God is taken and he waits sometime (till the milking of a good cow) for atithis and then he sits for his meal.

## BHOJANAM (TAKING ONE'S FOOD).

The person proposing to eat, washes his feet, does achamanam twice and cleans a space in his front with water mixing with it a little of cow's urine. On the spot thus [[०९९]]
[[९४]]

cleaned he places a plantain leaf after cleaning it well with water. A vessel filled with water is placed on his right side and he sits in front of the leaf. He should not sit at any time facing west but he may choose anyone of the remaining three. In his right hand he is expected to have a golden pavitram (a form of ring) on his ring finger and if he does not possess one he should make a pavitra out of darbha and put it on that finger.

Then he sits and his wife or some other person serves the various things cooked on the leaf. After this service he keeps both his hands in a saluting posture ("Kūppikkondu")

and prays saying "asmākam nityamastvetat." This means "Let this food be perpetual to us." He afterwards sprinkles water over his food saying "Om bhūrbhuvassuvah and does śōshana, dahana and plavanam. By repeating astra mantra he does digbandhanam and offers the food to the antaryamin (God who is inside his body).

In case one eats in another's house, he should offer mentally to his archai everything and to his antaryamin afterwards. Then he takes water in his right hand poured by his wife or some other person and with it and placing his legs so as to touch the ground he does parishechanam twice. To obtain this water he should not hold his hand across his food and the water poured into his hand should not fall on any vessel. While doing parishechanam he must repeat the mantra Om bhūrbhuvassuvah" (the names of lokas) "Satyam tvartēna parishinchami" (I sprinkle Agni around you who is Surya.) If it is night he is expected to use the words "Om bhūrbhuvassuvah" the names of lokas "Rtam tvā satyēna parishinchami" (I sprinkle Sūrya around you who is Agni).

He should then in his right hand receive a small quantity of sacred water used in the worship of God and drink it saying "Amrtopastaranamasi," as he does during Achamanam. Then he should do prānāhuti. He should hold the leaf on the left side in one place with his left thumb and the first and second fingers (really second and third if thumb is counted as the first), and using his thumb, middle finger and ring finger he should lift the food and place it in his mouth and while doing so he should repeat the words "Prānāya svāhā" Apānāya svāhā "" Vyanaya svāha" "Udanaya svaha" "Samānāya svāha." "I offer this (small quantity of cooked rice) to Prana. I offer this (small quantity of cooked rice) to Apana. I offer this (small quantity of cooked rice) to Vyana. I offer this (small quantity of cooked rice) to Udana. I offer this (small quantity of cooked rice)

to Samana and take as many handfuls of food (cooked rice with ghee)." After putting into his mouth the cooked food he repeats in the interval "Praṇāyēdam na mama," "Apanāyēdam na mama," "Vyānāyēdam na mama," "Udānāyēdam na mama Samānāyēdam na mama." This when translated runs thus:-"This is for Prana and it does not belong to me.

This is for Apana and it does not belong to me. This is for Vyana and it does not belong to me. This is for Udana and it does not belong to me This is for Samana and it does not belong to me." While thus taking the food into his mouth, he should think of God in the jatharagni and do homam mentally. It is only after fully swallowing one ahuti (quantity of food put in the mouth) another ahuti is taken into the mouth. The swallowing is so done that the food in the mouth does not come in contact with the teeth.

[[१००]]
After taking five morsels and repeating the mantras stated above, he should repeat as the last mantra "Brahmaṇima atma mrtatvaya" (May my jivātma merge in Paramatma for the sake of moksha.)

Then he cleans his left hand which was holding the leat by means of water poured over the fingers by his wife or some other person. Until this time he should be quiet without uttering anything except repeating the mantras already stated above Then he begins to eat the various things served on the leaf and which were offered to God previously. He should not take anything that is prohibited by rules During eating if he wants anything he may ask for it He may also talk to persons eating with him, provided the talk is to show respect to them in serving things. If he is forced to speak about anything outside the food, he should repeat "Om bhūrbhuvassuvah "
(the lokas Om bhūh, Bhuvah and Suvah) and then begin to eat again. Fruits, and bhakshyas should be broken into pieces by the fingers and while doing so the nails should not come in contact with these articles. For the Vadagalais things that should not be taken as food are described by Vedanta Deśika in a book called "Aharaniyamam," which consists of twenty-one stanzas in Tamil.

While eating, he should not be standing or place his legs on the seat. He should always do achamana before eating. He should not wear a single cloth, cover his body and head, touch another person, or be hearing the speeches of Sūdras, and women in menses. While eating in a line with others he should not get up in the middle. If he is obliged to get up, he should draw a line by using water, fire, a pole, or darbha between himself and his neighbour and then get up. From the vessel containing water he may drink once and he should not use the same water again. In case he has to partake the same water he has to pour on the floor some quantity of water from it and then use the water for drinking. While eating after swallowing every morsel he should repeat the name of God as Govinda. After eating to his satisfaction he removes the pavitra of darbha and holding it between the pavitra finger and the next one and receives the water for "Uttarāpōśanam." While drinking this water poured into his right hand he has to repeat "Amrtapidhānamasi." A small quantity of water must be left in the hand without sipping the whole quantity. This water which remains in the hand is poured on the left side of the leaf repeating "Rowrave punyanilayē padmarbuda nivasināmarthināmudakam datta makshayya mupatishthatu." This when translated runs as follows:--"This water is offered to those who have been longing for salvation by having been confined in Raurava Hell, the abode of sinners, for many many millions of years. May this undecaying offering please them." The darbha between the fingers is thrown below the leaf. After uttarāpōśanam the leaf should not be touched After getting up from the place, he goes out, cleans his hand and washes his mouth thrice and spits out the water each time on the left side. He may use some powder to clean his mouth and while doing so he uses water to finally clean his mouth १३ times and uses stick to remove dirt. The water put in the mouth for cleaning the mouth should not be swallowed but should be spitted out. The teeth should not be touched and washed by [[१०१]]
He cleans his hands and legs and does achamanam. Then sitting he repeats "Pranānām grandhirasi rudromā viśāntakastenānnenāpyāyasva" (oh Ahankara that is in my heart! you are inseparably united to my praṇa. May your presiding deity that is known by the name of Rudra being a destroyer of miseries enter into my body. May the food taken by me grow my body.) and touches his chest.

After this he repeats "Angushtha matrah purushōngushtamcha samāśritaḥ . Iśaḥ sarvasya jagataḥ prabhūḥ prīṇāti viśvabhuk". This in English runs thus:-" Paramatma of the size of one's own thumb lives in the space within the heart. He governs the whole world.

He is the master. May he be pleased by this food". Taking water in the hand he pours it down in such a way that it trickles through the right hand on the right toe. Afterwards touching the belly he repeats the following mantra:--" Śraddhayam praṇēniviśyā mṛtagm hutam pranamannēnāpāyasva, apāně naviśyāmrtam hutam apānamanne nāpyāyasva vyānē niviśyāmrtagm hutam vyānamannēnāpyayasva . udanēniviśyāmrtam hutam udānamanne nāpyāyasva . samānē niviśyāmrtagm hutam samānamānne napyāyasva . brahmanima ātmā amṛtatvāya." This runs in English thus:-- "With due reverence to vaidic observances and with great respect to Pranavāyu this imperishable and sweet oblation has been offered. Oh presiding deity of Pranavāyu! may this food increase you.

With great respect to Apana this imperishable and sweet oblation has been offered.

Oh presiding deity of Apana!. May this food increase you.

With great respect to Vyana this imperishable and sweet oblation has been offered.

Oh presiding deity of Vyana! may this food increase you.

With great respect to Udana this imperishable and sweet oblation has been offered.

Oh presiding deity of Udana! may this food increase you.

With great respect to Samana this imperishable and sweet oblation has been offered.

Oh presiding deity of Samana! may this food increase you.

May my Jivātmā merge in Paramatma for the sake of moksha." Next he sees the sun repeating "Udutyam Viśvāyasūryam." This in English is as follows:---"The well-known and one who knows all beings that are born so that the whole world may see the sun." After this he touches the stomach (belly) repeating the following:- "Vishnuratta tathaivāham parināmaścha vai sadā . satyēna tēna me bhuktam jīryatvannamidam tatah". "The eater of the food is Vishnu. I too am Vishnu. The changes that are always going on are Vishnu. I have eaten according to this principle. Let the food be digested." To those who take food with him, he presents betel leaves and nuts that were offered to God and then he takes the same for his own use. In chewing he must first put into his mouth the leaf and then only the nuts Then repeating "Bhagavānēva Ijyākhyēna "Krtancha ijyakhyam" he concludes by saying Vasudevah." [[१०२]]

## SVADHYAYAM.

[[९७]]
In the fourth yāma he does sankalpam as follows:-" Krtancha svādhyāyēna archayishyāmi." Then he repeats the bala mantra "Bhagavānēva svādhyāyākhyam karma karayati" and does satvikatyāgam. He then goes on reading about upanishads, the meanings and applications of the meanings of mūlamantra, studying Śrībhashya, reading of grandhas about God and his doings, Śrīmad Ramayana, Bhagavadgītā, and Bharata, and doing tatva nirnayas with Brahmacharis and disciples.

## SANDHYAVANDANAM.

Towards evening one should change his cloths by wearing fresh ones and do the evening sandhyavandanam. The performer is expected to clean his hands and feet and do prāṇāyāmam. Then he does sankalpam repeating "Śrībhagavadajñaya Śrīman Nārāyaṇaprītyartham sayam sandhyamupāsishyē". Prokshana, etc., are done as in the morning sandhyāvandanam. He does nyasam by repeating "Agniśchētyanuvākasya Suryarshiḥ . devīgayatricchandah . agnirdevatā." Then he takes water in his right hand as if for achamana and says "Apām prāśaně viniyogah" He then says the mantra "Agni- ścha māmanyuaścha manyupatayaścha manyukrtebhyaḥ . pāpēbhyorakshantam yadahnā papama kārsham . manasā vāchā hastābhyām padbhyā mudarēna śiśnā . ahastadavalumpatu yat kincha duritam mayi idamaham mamamrtayōnau . satyējyotishi juhō- mi svāhā " and drinks the water in his hand. (Same meaning as the mantra Sūryascha but some words are changed and they are "agniścha" = fire; "ahna"= day time (in the day time); aha=day time, "satye"== in the form of satyam. The arghya is done facing the west now. Other things are done as in the morning sandhyā.)

Then Japam is begun and the sankalpam should begin with the words usually repeated and it should refer to "Sayam sandhya" instead of "Pratassandhya." In this after repeating "āyātu varadādēvi aksharam brahma sammitam . Gayatrim āvāhayami" he does avahanam and repeats "Sayam sarasvatim śyāmām ravimandala madhyagam . samavedam vyāharantīm chakrayudha dharam śubhām ॥ Dhyāyāmi Vishnudaivatyam vrddhām garudavahanam . " (I contemplate on Sarasvati, as black in colour, repeating Sama Vedam, with chakram in hand, as old, with garuda as vahanam, as Vishnu, devata.)

He repeats the usual upasthāna mantra until "Gaccha dēvi yathā sukham" and after this he does nyasam repeating "Imammalti pancharchasya Devarāta rshih . gayatri trishtup, gāyatri jagati trishtubhaschandāmsi savitā dēvatā." (For the five riks in the mantra Imam me the Rshi is Devaratar; chandas is Gayatri, etc. Devata is the Sun.)

Then he does sankalpam for upasthanam and for it repeats the mantra "Imam me varuna srudhihavamadyacha mrdaya . tvamavasyu rachake . tatvāyāmi brahmanā vanda māna stadāśāste yajamāno havirbhiḥ . Ahedamano Varuṇēha bōdhyuruśagm samāna ayuhpramoshiḥ ॥ yacchiddhi të visðyathā pradeva varunavratam . minimasidyavidyavi . yat kinchēdam varunadaivyē janë abhidroham manushyāścharāmasi . [[१३]]
[[१०३]]
[[९८]]

achitti yattava dharmāyuyōpima manastasmā dēnasō dēvarIrishah ॥ Kitavāsō yadri- ripur nadivi yadvāghā satya mutayanna vidma . sarvātā vishya śithirēva devāthātesyāma varuna priyāsaḥ." Translation:-Oh Varuna! Listen to this prayer of mine. You should make me a happy being now alone. Desiring my protection I am praying to you for my satisfaction.

Therefore I am becoming your slave by praising you by means of Vedas. One who does yaga by the offering of purōdāśa, etc., prays for what he wants Oh Varuna! In this world you should listen and accept my prayers. One who has a big reputation, please do not destroy my life (ayus). Oh Varunadeva! That vrata which is done daily for you daily like men we become destroyers. Oh devata! do not trouble us with those sins which we as human beings by ignorance may have done towards devatās and those sins by which we destroyed your dharmas (good things). Kindly destroy all those sins of ours that were done by us as hypocrites, those sins committed by us knowing them to be sins, and those committed by us without our knowledge Let those sins be destroyed Then we become people well known to you and liked by you.

The remaining part is similar to that done in the morning.

After sandhyāvandanam he does the aupasanam in the evening also as was done in the morning. If possible he does pūja to God as in the morning or day time. He does everything from alankarāsanam to śayanāsanam as already described. During "Bhojyāsanam" all things prepared for the use in the night should be placed before God for nivedanam. Then he does Vaiśvadēvam by doing only the six ahutis and the homam.

Then he eats the food observing all the rules and regulations already described.

After food does Vedadhyayanam, reads Puranas, etc. In the end he does Satvikatyāgam as usual and prays as usual to God.

## YOGA.

He cleans his legs and hands and does the usual achamanam. Sitting in a clean spot facing east he does three pranayamams. Then he does sankalpam repeating "Krtancha Yogēna Archayishyāmi." Next he does satvikatyāga repeating "Bhagavānēva.

yogākhyam kārayati." He repeats after this "Amalanādipiran, Śrī Vaikuntha gadya, Bhagavaddhyāna Sopānam, etc. and contenplates on God's greatness and his good doings. As soon as he feels sleepy he lies down believing that he is placing his head at the feet of God. If he wakes from sleep till he sleeps again he contemplates on God. Sleep is to be considered as rest to enable one to be able to do Bhagavad āradhana, etc., during the day as usual.

For one who does Bhagavadarādhana during the five periods of the day, all duties become services to God. He does not waste even a second. All the good things one is enjoying becomes part of God's enjoyment only. An orthodox man is expected to spend his time in this manner.

[[१०४]]

[[९९]]