+++
title = "02 Vishnu Worship"

+++
According to some modern critics Vishnu worship in India can undoubtedly be traced as far back as the fourth century after Christ. Dr. Bhandarkar states that Vasudeva and Sankarshana were worshipped as gods in the Mahratta country about the first century before Christ (१०० B.C.)* The worship of God under the name of Vishnu can be traced to the epics and even to the Vedas. No doubt the term Vishnu occurs in the Vedas, but according to some modern scholars the Vedic gods are believed to be numerous and different, and Vishnu was not recognized as the supreme deity by men during Vedic times. But the orthodox Sri Vaishnavas who are well versed in Vedas hold that Vishnu was recognized by the Vedas as the supreme deity. They think that the views held by modern critics are due to a misconception. According to them the various parts of the Vedas were not written Page ४८ Vaishnavism, Saivism and minor religious systems.

[[००८]]
The Sri Vaishnava Brahmans ३ at different times with long intervals, but were brought into existence simultaneously.

They also aver that the different parts of the Vedas were compiled with definite purposes.

It would be wrong to expect to find general and philosophical ideas of God in the portions written especially for guidance in carrying on various rituals, ceremonies, etc.

It would be equally wrong to expect to find in the philosophical portions ideas about the conducting of rites and ceremonies.

Modern critics and scholars generally hold that the Vedic periods were several and that the idea of God varied with these periods. In other words, they recognize three phases of thought in the Rg Veda, namely, nature-worship, monotheism and monism.

To the earliest seers of the Vedic hymns natural objects such as the moon, sky, stars, sea, dawn or nightfall appear to be gods. This regarding of natural objects as God and worshipping them as such is believed to constitute the pantheistic stage.

When man began to think more about himself and his own agency he was induced to project himself and think of the spiritual agencies in his own form. So anthrophomorphism followed pantheism. Dyaus, Varuna, Mitra, are all considered to be Vedic gods. Sūrya, Pūshan, Agni, Soma, Parjanya, etc., are also Vedic gods.

In this connection we may quote what Barnett, one of the modern scholars, says about these:- "Most of them (gods) are taken from the religion of the people, and dressed in new garb according to the imagination of the priest; and a few are priestly inventions altogether. There is Dyaushpita, the Sky-father, with Prithvi-Mata, the Earth-mother; there are Vayu, the wind spirit, Parjanya, the rain-god, Sūrya, the sun-god and other spirits of the sky such as Savita; there is the Dawn goddess, Ushas. All these are or were originally defied powers of nature; the people, though their imagination created them, have never felt any deep interest in them, and the priests who have taken them into their charge, though they treat them very courteously and sing to them elegant hymns full of figures of speech, have not been able to cover them with the flesh and blood of living personality. Then we have Agni, the fire-god, and Soma, the spirit of the intoxicating juice of the soma plant, which is used to inspire the pious to drunken raptures in certain ceremonies; both of these have acquired a peculiar importance through their association with priestly worship, especially Agni, because he, as bearing to the gods the sacrifices cast into his flames, has become the ideal Priest and Divine Paraclete of Heaven. Nevertheless all this hieratic importance has not made them gods in the deeper sense, reigning in the hearts of men. Then we find powers of doubtful origin, Mitra, Varuna, and Vishnu and Rudra, and figures of heroic legend, like the warrior Indra and the twin charioteers called Aśvinā and Nasatyā. All these with many others, have their worship in the Rig Veda: the priests sing their praises lustily, and often speak now of one deity, now of another, as being the highest divinity without the least consistency." (Hindu Gods and Heroes-Wisdom of the East-pages १२-१४.)

"Sūrya and Savita are worshipped as nature-power and not as personal Gods," I-A [[००९]]

"The Rg-Veda is essentially a priestly book; but it is not entirely a priestly book.

Much of the thought to which it gives utterance is popular in origin and sentiment, and is by no means of the lowest order. On this ground-work the priests have built up a system of hieratic thought and ritual of their own, in which there is much that deserves a certain respect. There is a good deal of fine poetry in it. There is also in it some idea of a law of righteousness: in spite of much wild and unmoral myth and fancy, its gods for the most part are not capricious demons but spirits who act in accordance with established laws, majestic and wise beings in whom are embodied the highest ideals to which men have risen yet. Moreover, the priests in the later books have given us some mystic hymns containing vigorous and pregnant speculations on the deepest questions of existence, speculations which are indeed fanciful and unscientific, but which nevertheless have in them germs of powerful idealism that is destined to arise in centuries to come. On the other hand, the priests have cast their system in the mould of ritualism. Ritual, ceremony, sacrifice, professional benefit-these are their predominant interests. The priestly ceremonies are conceived to possess a magical power of their own; and the fixed laws of ritual by which these ceremonies are regulated tend to eclipse, and finally even to swallow up, the laws of moral righteousness under which the gods live. A few generations more, and the priesthood will frankly announce its ritual to be the supreme law of the universe. Meanwhile they are becoming more and more indifferent to the personalities of the gods, when they have preserved any; they are quite ready to ascribe attributes of one deity to another, even attributes of nominal supremacy, with unscrupulous inconsistency and dubious sincerity; for the personalities of the different gods are beginning to fade away in their eyes, and in their mind is arising the conception of a single universal Godhead." (L. D. Barnett---Hindu Gods and Heroes-pp. ४२-४४.)

"Priests" Barnett says "sing to Vāyu, Sūrya and Agni considering each of them as Gods" This is only an assumption on the part of Mr. Barnett according to the orthodox Sri Vaishnava Brahmans. They think that Mr. Barnett does not seem to understand the real mentality of the Hindu Vedic men. To interpret the text of the Vedas, as understood by the Vaidiki Brahmans who know the Vedas, it is absolutely necessary to know certain explanations which are usually given orally. Since these explanations are not generally reduced to writing, misreading and misinterpretation become possible. The remarks of Mr. Barnett are quoted at length just to show how modern European scholars think of the Hindu conceptions of God from Vedic times. Whatever may be the view of the modern European critics and scholars, it is not certainly supported by the Sri Vaishnavas. All the remarks made by Mr. Barnett, they say, would disappear if he understands the mentality and viewpoint of the Vaidiki Brahmans well-versed in the Vedas. They maintain that the idea of one God is certainly derivable from the Vedas, and that the various gods mentioned and worshipped are only subordinate and do not refer to the supreme deity. Mr. Barnett says that Dyaushpita, Prithvīmāta, Vāyu, Parjanya, Sūrya and Ushas were originally held to be deified powers of nature. But [[०१०]]

५
according to the Hindu conceptions, these are not to be considered as gods, but only as spirits. If they refer to God in them, they think only of the spirit of God existing in them, as they form part of the universe.

The conception that in the soma sacrifice the intoxicating spirits of the soma plant is made use of is not correct. The soma juice used is not an intoxicating juice at all.

The European scholars have made the mistake of considering this as such. The rules given to make the soma juice are such that it could never be an intoxicating stuff-See the article "Soma juice is not liquor" by N. B. Pavgee, Poona-pages ७०-७९ in the Third Oriental Conference Report, Madras, १९२४.