+++
title = "03 Vaishnavism of South India"

+++
A devout Sri Vaishnava thinks that he should strive his best to obtain moksha or salvation and that this is possible only through an Acharya or a religious teacher.

Without the intervention of an Acharya, however learned one may be, he cannot hope to attain moksha. In support of this view many a Vaishnava often quotes the examples of the wicked Kshatrabandhu and the good and pious Pundarikaksha who both obtained salvation only through an Acharya. In the case of both these men Narada appeared to be their Acharya According to Rahasyāmnāyam every person desirous of obtaining moksha is expected to seek an Acharya and to show always respect towards him and to his Acharyas and so on up to God. God is considered to be the greatest Acharya for the whole world, as he is the master of everything in this universe. All Sri Vaishnavas firmly believe that God being all merciful He would not allow the souls to get away from Him and that He would do everything that is just to save them from going astray from Him. This view is inculcated by every Sri Vaishnavite Acharya from Ramanuja downwards. Ramanuja in his introduction to the Gita Bhashya says "God in his infinite mercy assumed various forms without putting away his own essential god-like nature, and time after time incarnated himself descending not only with the purpose of relieving the burden of the earth, but also to be accessible to men, even such as we are, so revealing himself to the world as to be visible to the sight of all, and doing such other marvellous deeds as to ravish the hearts and eyes of all beings, high and low." Vedanta Deśika, another preceptor of the Sri Vaishnavas expresses himself in a similar strain in the introductory chapter of his Rahasyatrayasaram, a work written in "Mani- pravāļam" (a mixture of Tamil and Sanskrit) and highly prized by the Vadagalai Sri Vaishnavas In it he says that the Lord gave the Vedas in former days to Brahma and when these sacred Vedas were stolen from Brahma God secured them back to Brahma.

He brought into existence śāstras and caused them to be taught to men through Brahma.

Through Sanat-Kumaras, sons of Brahma, he sought to promulgate good ideas. God tried to keep up the correct way (sampradayam) through the Maharshis Narada, Parāśara, Śuka and Saunaka. These rshis did their best. Then Vyasa was created and he was induced to write the great epic-the Mahabharata-for the enlightenment of the people of the world. Next God himself became incarnate in this world as Hamsa, [[०११]]
६

Matsya, Hayagrīva, Nara Narayana, Gitacharya and as the avatars Rama and Krshṇa, and in these forms taught tatvas and several good things. He caused the proper views expressed by himself to be promulgated by such wise men as Bhishma; he gave out to the world many truths by Pancharatra śastras. Finally he himself incarnated as ten avatars in the form of Parānkuśa, Parakāla, etc. Just as clouds drink water from the sea and pour down this water as rain, so essential for the up-keep of all living beings, these Āzhvārs gave out in their own mother tongue (Tamil) the essence of the Vedic teachings.

In the land of Agastya the Lord became incarnate in the form of several saints as prophesied in the stanza found in the Bhagavata Purana and quoted below :- "Kalau khalu bhavishyanti nārāyaṇa parayanah kvachit kvachinmahabhaga dramidēshu cha bhurisah . tambraparni nadi yatra krtamālā payasvinī. kavēricha mahabhāgā pratichicha Mahanadi ॥ " This when rendered freely into English runs thus :--- "It is in Kaliyuga that some devoted exclusively to Narayaṇa are to arise here and there in some places; but they are to be born in larger numbers in the region of the Dravida country, by the side of the rivers Tambraparnī, Vaigai, Palar, and in the region of the famous Kavēri and in the Mahanadi (Periyar) which flows to the west." On noting the birth places of the ten Azhvārs it looks as if the prophecy alluded to in the stanza already quoted is fulfilled. The great saint Sathakopa or Nammāzhvar was born in the land of Tambraparni and in the same region Madurakavi also was born; Peria Āzhvar and his daughter in the region of the Vaigai; Poigai, Pey and Bhūtat Āzhvars belong to the Palar region as well as the great Tirumahisai.

As the stanza quoted above is not found in certain manuscript copies and printed editions of Bhagavata Purana some critics maintain this stanza to be an interpolation and believe the insertion to have taken place long after the appearance of these Azhvars.

According to some critics the whole chapter dealing with Azhvārs, Acharyas and Avatars is said to be an interpolation. However this may be, it is clear that this interpolation should have taken place long before the time of Vedanta Deśika because he bases his views expressed in Rahasyatrayasāram on this sloka of Bhagavata Purana.

On the other hand, the learned amongst this community of Brahmans hold this not to be an interpolation. They hold that Bhagavatam was in existence long before the time of the Āzhvars and that the passage relating to the birth of Āzhvārs is not an interpolation. They hold that many of the Tamil stanzas of the Prabandha echo the sentiments expressed in the Bhagavata Purana, and they say that in some cases they are almost similar to ślōkas in the Bhagavata Purāṇa.

Vishnu, or Narayana as he is generally called, is considered to be the supreme Deity by all the Sri Vaishnavas. Narayana is considered to be ever in close association with Lakshmi. She shares all powers and responsibilities with Narayana and is on a par with him. This idea is held by every learned Vadagalai Sri Vaishnava and in support of this they quote or refer to the Chatuślōki of Śrī Āļavandar (see page १८ for the Chatuśloki)

In these four stanzas Alavandar maintains that Lakshmi shares with Narayana the bed, the vahana, and that the devas with their wives are her servants. Her splendour is as [[०१२]]
[[७]]
boundless as that of her lord and he too cannot measure it. The three worlds are flourishing on account of her grace only. In all his Vibhutis, she is associated with him and is never found separately. This is the view held by all Vadagalai Sri Vaishnavites.

But the Tengalai Sri Vaishnavas do not consider her to belong to the same category as Narayana and hold that Sri or Lakshmi is on a lower plane than Narayana and on a par with other lives-including the souls of human beings.

The chief doctrines held by the Vadagalai section of the Sri Vaishnavas at the earliest times are the following and they hold good even now. I. The Lord (Narayana) with Sri Lakshmi is the supreme being; २. Souls and God are different; ३. By resigning oneself to God salvation is obtained; ४. Conscious volition and thought of Him at the time of death (especially for the faithful) is unnecessary; ५. An Acharya should be sought by every one; ६. Moksha can certainly be attained by having an Acharya (preceptor or teacher).

The following Tamil stanza of Tirumahisai Azhvar expresses well the Vaishnavite conception of God and his Grace :- "इऩ्ऱाग नाळैये याग इऩिच्चिऱिदुम निऩ्ऱाग निऩ्ऩरुळॆऩ पालदे - नऩ्ऱाग नाऩुऩ्ऩै यऩऱियिलेऩ कण्डाय नारणऩे! नीयॆऩ्ऩै यऩऱियिलै " "Whether to-day, to-morrow, later on or a long time after, your grace is certainly mine. O Narayana, I very well know that I am not without you and you without me." All Sri Vaishnava Brahmans hold the Azhvars and Acharyas in very great veneration, so much so, that the images of Azhvars and chief Acharyas are set up in many a temple and are worshipped. This reverence and worship is due to the belief that the Azhvars and the Acharyas represent amsams of God. Their great learning and piety is attributed to the presence of the amsams of God.

Ramanuja, the great reformer, is the first of the recent Acharyas to be represented by an image in a temple. Annually utsavams are celebrated to him in the month of Chittiar.

His nakshatra day is "Tiruvadirai," and this nakshatram is taken into consideration while fixing the utsavam in the Chitra month. Next to him the two great Acharyas Sri Vedanta Deśika and Sri Manavala Maha Munigal, who are the special Acharyas of the Vadagalai and Tengalai sects are similarly treated. The festival of Vedanta Deśika is celebrated in the month of Purattasi on śrāvanam day and that of Manavāļa Maha Muni- gal in the month of Arpisi on mūlam day.

This tendency to represent Acharyas by images is now seen to be working in the minds of some. Recently the swami of the Ahobila Matt, who is now the head of the matt, established in the matt an idol for one of his predecessors who happened to be his own Acharya. Similarly images of their Acharyas are set up by a few Sri Vaishnavas in Conjeeveram and Kumbakonam. Generally, however, Sri Vaishnavas who do not belong to the Ahobila Matt have a different mentality and so they are not disposed to set up images for any of their recent Acharyas subsequent to Vedanta Deśika or Manavala Maha Munigal.

[[०१३]]
८

Every Sri Vaishnava Brahman of the Vadagalai and Tengalai sects remembers the succession of Āchāryas and Āzhvārs prior to his own up to the Supreme Being who is considered to be the great Āchārya for the whole universe, by repeating daily or whenever he has to do anything of the nature of a religious ceremony the names of his Āchāryas and Āzhvārs up to God. The following is usually remembered and repeated by a Vadagalai Sri Vaishnava on occasions when he has to remember his Āchāryas up to God:- "Asmat Gurubhyonamaḥ; asmatparamagurubhyonamaḥ; asmat sarva gurubhyō- namaḥ; Śrīmate Vedanta Guravēnamaḥ; Śrimate Ramūnujāyanamaḥ; Śri Parankuśayanamaḥ (Śrimate Mahā Pūrṇāyanamah); Śrīmad Yamunamunayenamaḥ; Śrī Rāma Miśrayanamaḥ; Śrī Pundarikākshayanamaḥ; Śrīman Nathamunayenamaḥ; Śrīmad Śathakōpayanamaḥ; Śrīmad Vishvaksēnayanamaḥ; Sriyainamaḥ; Sridharāyanamah." "Asmaddeśikam asmadiya paramāchāryān aśēshān gurūn Śriman Lakshmana yogi Pungava Mahā Pūrṇam Munim Yamunam Ramani padma vilōchanam munivaram natham satha dvēshinam sēnēśam Śriyamindira sahacharam Narayanam samśraye ॥--" Some also repeat the following Tamil stanza composed by Vedanta Deśika in addition to the above two Sanskrit ślōkas. Those who do not know Sanskrit understand the Tamil much better and know what they are repeating.

" ऎऩऩुयिर् तन्दळित्तवरैस सरणम्बुक्कि याऩडैवे यवागुरुक्कळ् निरैवणङ्गि पिऩ्ऩरुळाल् पॆरुमबूदूर् वन्दवळ्ळल् पॆरियनम्बि आळवन्दार् मण कगाल्नम्बि नऩ्ऩॆऱियै यवाक्कुरैदद उय्यगॊण्डार नादमुऩि सडगोबऩ् सेऩै नादऩ् इऩ्ऩमुदत्तिरु मगळॆऩऱि वागळै मुऩ्ऩिड टॆम्बॆरुमाऩ तिरुवडिग ळडैगिऩऱेऩे." This when translated runs as follows:- "I am surrendering myself to him who initiated me into the knowledge of myself and am saluting the line of his Āchāryas; then, I am also saluting respectfully these Āchāryas, viz. the most merciful Emberumānār who was born in Sriperumbudur, Mahā Pūrṇa (also called Periya Nambi), Āļavandar, Manakkal Nambi (also called Śrī Ramamiśra), Pundarīkākshar who initiated into the secrets of Prapatti Maṇakkal Nambi, Nathamuni, Sathakopan and Senainathan (Vishvaksenar) and Lakshmi who is as sweet and dear to God as amritam; and with their help I am reaching the feet of Śriyappati (husband of Śrī, i.e., God)." In all the stanzas quoted above the order of the preceptors is the same. At first one thinks of his own immediate Āchārya, then his Āchārya's preceptors, next the prominent Āchāryas, Vedanta Deśika and Ramanuja. After this the preceptors Manakkal Nambi, Uyyakkondar and Nathamunigal are mentioned. Then Sathakopan or Nammāzhvar is thought of and he is the only one of the Āzhvārs mentioned though there are ten of them.

[[०१४]]

९
This is because he is the only Āzhvar who is entitled to a place in the list of gurus.

So far beings of this world are thought of. Then follow Senesa, Śrī Lakshmi and Śrīman Narayana, all inhabitants of the superhuman celestial region Śrt Vaikuntham.