+++
title = "05 Acharyas"

+++
Now coming to the line of Āchāryas the first of them was Nāthamuni. He was born according to tradition, ३,६४१ years after the great Saint Nammāzhvar. That is to say he was born in the year ३६८४ of Kaliyuga. As he was endowed with yogic powers he was often called the Yogi or Nathamuni Yogi. While staying at Viranarayanapuram he heard the recital by Sri Vaishnavas of the pasuram “Ārāvamude” in the presence of God Rajagopala in the temple. Learning from them that it might be possible to find some one who knew all the pasurams (stanzas) of the Āzhvars and especially those of the great Nammāzhvar at Srinagari (Tirunagari), he met in that place one Parankuśadāsa, one of the disciples of Madurakavi. On being questioned Parānkuśadāsa said that he knew only the ten stanzas usually called “क" and continued that anyone who reverentially and with faith repeats the stanzas १२,००० times may find favour in the eyes of the Nammāzhvâr and thus be blessed with his glorious presence.

Nathamunigal carried out the repetition of Madurakavi's stanzas successfully under Parānkuśadāsa's guidance and in response to this prayer Sathakopan (Nammāzhvar)

appeared to Nathamuni in a vision and asked him what he wanted. To this Nathamuni replied that he wished to be taught the Prabandhams of the Āzhvars and be instructed in the spiritual knowledge. Then Sathakopa (Nammāzhvar) endowed Nathamuni with divine vision and taught him the three Rahasyas, the Prabandham, the essence of various schools of philosophy and systems of religion and the mysteries of the eight-fold path of yoga. Nathamuni resided there for a time devoting himself to the service of the Lord Adinatha and Sathakopa.

Nathamuni as soon as he learnt the Prabandhams caused them to be set to music with the assistance of his nephews, Bhadraksha and Rama Miśra.

Nathamuni was succeeded by Uyyakondar (Pundarīkāksha), born in the year ३९२७ of Kaliyuga. He was directed by his master to communicate the secrets of religion to his grandson, Yamuna Muni (or Ālavandar). As Uyyakondar was unable to carry out the wishes of his master before his death, he desired the best of his disciples, Manakkal Nambi (Rama Miśra), to fulfil his master's wish by initiating Yamunacharya into the secrets.

Manakkal Nambi was born in the year ३९३२ of Kaliyuga. When this Āchārya (also called Rama Miśra) was about ८५ years of age, Yamunacharya was born (in the year ४०१७ of Kaliyuga), and as soon as he heard of the birth of this grandson to Nathamunigal he hurried to the birth place and on the १२th day from the birth of the child caused him to be ३
[[०२३]]
१८ Bulletin, Madras Government Museum. [G.S., named "Yamunacharya" in accordance with the directions of his own master Uyyakondar (Pundarikaksha). Yamunacharya when of age began the study of Vedas and Śastras and very soon became an efficient and well-read scholar. Later on in his life he had a contest with Akkialvan and won a victory over him. As the result of this success he was given by the Raja a large portion of his kingdom. From that time Yamunacharya lived like a prince and he was also named Alavandar" after this victory over Akkiāļvan. Manakkal Nambi (Rama Misra) could not meet Ālavandar, and so instead of going empty handed he used to supply daily the green leaves of the plant "Tutuvalai" (Solanum trilobatum), a solanaceous plant, of which Alavandar was very fond, for six months. Then Manakkal Nambi discontinued the supply of these green leaves for four days successively. Alavandar (Yamunacharya) noticing the absence of the preparation of this green leaf questioned the cook. On hearing from the cook that Manakkal Nambi who was bringing these leaves daily did not do so for the last four days, he ordered the cook to direct Manakkal Nambi to him when he would come. On the fifth day Manakkal Nambi came and was taken before Ālavandar. On seeing Ālavandar Manakkal Nambi told him that he was entrusted by his grand-father's request with some treasure to be bequeathed This aroused the attention of Alavandar and so he followed Manakkal Nambi, who gradually instilled into Alavandar's mind spiritual truths As the result of this Upadesa Ālavandar renounced the world and became a sanyasin.

As a spiritual teacher Alavandar became a great sanyasin and even Ramanuja owes a great deal to his indirect influence. That his doctrines and mode of thinking were entirely based upon Visistadvaita philosophy is very clear from one of his writings "Stotra Ratnam." He also insisted upon the view now held by every Vadagalai Sri Vaishnava that Lakshmi or Śrī was endowed with Vibhutvam just like Narayana and that she was with him always, everywhere and in all Vibhūtis.

Alavandar's Chatuślokī describes Lakshmi and he considers both God and Lakshmi as equal- "(१) The best of purushas, ie., God, is your dear husband; Ādiśēsha is your bed and he is your seat; Garuda, the lord of birds, the embodiment (svarupa) of vedas is your vahanam (carrier); the prakriti (primordial matter) which bewitches everybody is your curtain. Brahma, Rudra, and devatas with their wives are your male and man servants; you are yourself called Śrī; Oh Lakshmi! who is full of good and auspicious qualities how shall we describe you! "(२) Your mahima (greatness in everything) which is boundless and ever-loving like that of your husband cannot be measured even by the God of your heart, who is also the most powerful or knowing. Oh Lakshmi ! who is the one mistress of all the worlds and who is the wife of the Bhagavan, the Lord of all the lokas, I, who know your mercy that is shown by you to those who throw themselves at your feet, have now begun to worship without fear, knowing that I am your servant and a prapanna "(३) The three worlds that were decaying by the want of your mercy shown by the ambrosia of your sight are now flourishing as they are having now your protection; [[०२४]]
[[१९]]
without your grace who is dear to the heart of Bhagavān having eyes like lotus flowers men cannot obtain the highest bliss of attaining aiśvarya (dharma, artha and kama), enjoying pure jīvātma and reaching God through archirādi mārga.

"(४) The Supreme Being who is without any change, who is limitless and is far above all things and who is called Brahman, the Supreme Being who likes his most wonderful form with angas called Paravāsudēva and the Supreme Being whose incarnations are manifested for his own pleasure is inseparably associated with you, Oh, Lakshmi who is capable of assuming the different forms appropriate to God's forms."