+++
title = "07 Conception of God as laid down by Ramanuja"

+++
To have a clear view of what Ramanuja tried to establish regarding the idea of Brahman or Absolute Being, which was then acquiesced in and followed by his disciples and followers, it is necessary to dwell on Sankara's view of Brahman as developed in Advaitism and elaborated in his Bhashya on the Vedanta Sutras. Sankara holds that Brahman is the only real thing and all else including ourselves and our experiences are non-existent and hence unreal. The belief in our individual existence arising from our bodily experience and its entanglement in the samsara is said to be an error. The higher knowledge showed the whole world and its inhabitants enveloped in ignorance and in the grip of illusion. So, from Sankara's standpoint God is impersonal and consequently indifferent to the love or suffering of the humanity. A Brahman thus devoid of all gunas (Nirguna Brahman) cannot be expected to satisfy the cravings of an intense religious insight. Further it is impossible to infer the existence of such a one by any means, perception, inference or scriptures.

Ramanuja accepts the existence of the Absolute Being and does not hold that everything in this universe outside the Being is unreal or illusory. On the other hand to him everything is real. He preaches that there is a very intimate relation between the soul, matter and God. According to him God permeates and forms the basis of everything in this universe. God is not merely a transcendental Absolute Being above and beyond the finite Universe, but as already stated God is both immanent and transcendent.

Although the conscious (chit) and unconscious (achit) objects of the Universe co-exist with God, they yet derive their existence from Him and are sustained through Him. The pluralistic Universe is real in precisely the same sense as God is real. Thus matter and soul are dependent on God as their ground and they are what they are because of the Brahman. God is the Soul and controlling power of the Universe.

"According to our view, on the other hand, Brahman, which has for its body all sentient and non-sentient beings, whether in their subtle or their gross state is always in its effected as well as in its casual condition-free from all shadow of imperfection and a limitless ocean as it were of exalted qualities. All imperfections, and suffering and all changes belong not to Brahman, but only to the sentient and non-sentient beings which are its modes." (S.B.E.-४८th Vol., Thibaut, page ५४४.)

"The highest Brahman which is denoted by the term "Being" is the substantial and also the operative cause of the world, that it is all knowing, endowed with all powers; that its purposes come true; that it is the inward principal, the support and ruler of everything; and that distinguished by these and other qualities it constitutes the Self of the entire world" (S.B.E.-४८th Vol., Thibaut, page ७८.)

[[०३०]]
In Śrī Bhashya Ramanuja says as follows about God:---" He who knows me as unborn and without a beginning, the Supreme Lord of the worlds" (Bhag. Gita X, ३); "All beings abide in me, I abide not in them. Nay, the beings abide not in me-behold my wordly power. My Self bringing forth the beings supports them but does not abide in them" (Bhag. Gita IX, ४, ५); “I am the origin and the dissolution of the entire world; higher than I there is nothing else; on me all this is strung as pearls on a thread" (Bhag. Gita, VII-६, ७); "Pervading this entire universe by a portion (of mine) I abide" (Bhag. Gita, X-४२); "But another the highest person, is called the highest Self, who pervading the three worlds supports them, the Eternal Lord. Because I transcend the perishable and am higher than the Imperishable even, I am among the people and in the Veda celebrated as the Supreme Person" (Bhag. Gita XV-१७ and १८).

"He transcends the fundamental matter of all beings, its modifications, properties and imperfections; he transcends all investing (obscuring) influences, He who is the Self of all. Whatever (room) there is in the interstices of the world is filled by Him; all auspicious qualities constitute His nature. The whole creation of beings is taken out of a small part of His power. Assuming at will whatever form He desires He bestows benefits on the whole world effected by Him. Glory, strength, dominion, wisdom, energy, power, and other attributes are collected in Him, Supreme of the Supreme, in whom no troubles abide, Ruler over high and low, Lord in collective and distributive form, non-manifest and manifest, universal lord, all seeing, all knowing, all powerful, Highest Lord. The knowledge by which that perfect, pure, highest, stainless homogeneous (Brahman) is known or perceived or comprehended that is knowledge: all else is ignorance." (Vish. Pur. VI-५, ८२-८७.)

"To that pure one of mighty power, the highest Brahman to which no term is applicable, the cause of all causes, the name "Bhagavat" is suitable. The letter bha implies both the cherisher and the supporter, the letter ga the leader, mover and creator.

The two syllables bhaga indicate the six attributes dominion, strength, glory, splendour, wisdom, dispassion. That in Him the universal Self, the Self of the beings all beings dwell and that He dwells in all, this is the meaning of the letter va. Wisdom, might, strength, dominion, glory, without any evil qualities, are all denoted by the word bhagavat. This great word bhagavat is the name of Vasudeva who is the highest Brahman and of no one else. This word which denotes persons worthy of reverence in general is used in its primary sense with reference to Vasudeva only; in a derived sense with regard to other persons." (Vish. Pur. VI-४, ७२ pp.)

"Where all these powers abide, that is the form of Him who is the universal form: that is the great form of Hari. That form produces in its sport forms endowed with all powers, whether of gods, men or animals. For the purpose of benefiting the worlds, not springing from work (Karma) is the action of the unfathomable one; all pervading, irresistible." (Vish. Pur. VII-७, ६९-७१.)

"Him who is of this kind, stainless, eternal, all pervading, imperishable, free from all evil, named Vishnu, the highest abode " (Vish. Pur. I-२२, ५३); "He who is the highest of ४
[[०३१]]
[[२६]]

the High, the Person, the highest Self, founded on Himself; who is devoid of all the distinguishing characteristics of colour, caste and the like; who is exempt from birth change, increase, decay, and death; of whom it can only be said that He ever is. He is everywhere and in Him everything abides; hence He is called Vasudeva by those who know. He is Brahman, eternal, supreme, imperishable, undecaying; of one essential nature and ever pure, as free from all defects. This whole world is Brahman, comprising within its nature the Evolved and the Unevolved; and also existing in the form of the Person and in that of time" (Vish. Pur. I-२, १०-१४). "The Prakriti about which I told and which is Evolved as well as Unevolved, and the Person-both these are merged in the highest Self. The highest Self is the support of all, the highest Lord; as Vishnu he is praised in the Vedas and the Vedanta texts" (Vish Pur. VI-४, ३८, ३९). "Two forms are there of that Brahman, one material, the other immaterial. These two forms, perishable and imperishable, are within all things: the imperishable one is the highest Brahman, the perishable one this whole world. As the light of a fire burning in one place spreads all round, so the energy of the highest Brahman constitutes this entire world" (Vish.

Pur. I-२३, ५३--५५). "The energy of Vishnu is the highest, that which is called the embodied soul is inferior; and there is the third energy called Karma or Nescience, actuated by which the omnipresent energy of the embodied soul perpetually undergoes the afflictions of the worldly existence. Obscured by Nescience the energy of the embodied soul is characterised in the different beings by different degrees of perfection." (Vish. Pur V-७, ६१ ६३)

These and other texts teach that highest Brahman is essentially free from all umperfection whatsoever, comprises within itself all auspicious qualities, and finds its pastime in originating, preserving, reabsorbing, pervading, and ruling the universe; that the entire complex of intelligent and non-intelligent beings (souls and matter) in all their different estates is real and constitutes the form, १.c. the body of the highest Brahman, as appears from those passages which co-ordinate it with the Brahman by means of terms such as śarīra (body), rūpa (form), tanu (body), amśa (part), śakti (power), vibhūti (manifestation of power), and so on; that the souls which are a manifestation of Brahman's power exist in their own essential nature, and also, through their connexion with matter, in the form of embodied souls (Kshetrajña); and that the embodied souls, being engrossed by Nescience in the form of good and evil works, do not recognize their essential nature, which is knowledge, but view themselves as having the character of material things. The outcome of all this is that we have to recognize Brahman as carrying plurality within itself, and the world, which is the manifestation of his power, as something real. (S.B.E.--Thibaut, Vol. ४८, pp ८६-८९.)

According to the view of Sankara, the texts in some Upanishads negative the existence of plurality But Ramanuja replies thus: ---" But what all these texts deny is only plurality in so far as contradicting that unity of the world which depends on its being in its entirety an effect of Brahman, and having Brahman for its inward ruling principle and its true Self. They do not, on the other hand, deny that plurality on [[०३२]]
[[२७]]

Brahman's part which depends on its intention to become manifold-a plurality proved by the text "May I be many, may I grow forth." (K. Up. VI, २-३.)

Along with Ramanuja all orthodox Sri Vaishnavas hold that Brahman, the sole cause of the world, is known only through the Vedas or Śastras. He cannot be the object of our senses, nor can we have a perception of this object. Ordinary generalizations from our own experience could neither prove nor disprove his existence. Intelligence, however, points to the reality of Brahman and it must be admitted that this reality lies in a region beyond that which can be actually seen or understood by finite intelligence. Ramanuja in his Śri Bhashya says "With regard to supersensuous matters, Scripture (Vedas) alone is authoritative, and that reasoning is to be applied, only to the support of the Scripture (Vedas). (S.B.E, Vol. ४८, p ४२६.) As the possession, on the Brahman's part, of various powers (enabling it to emit the world) rests exclusively on the authority of the word of the Veda and thus differs altogether from other matters (which fall within the sphere of the other means of knowledge also), the admission of such powers is not contrary to reason.

Brahman cannot either be proved or disproved by means of generalizations from experience (S.B.E.--Thibaut's ४८th vol., p. ४७४.)

Rāmānuja insists throughout his writings that God must always be thought of in two aspects, one, the Supreme Lord beyond our comprehension, but thought of by men as existing in Vaikuntha and the other the personal aspect of the Supreme. It is these two aspects that are often referred to as the two Vibhūtis of God by Alavandar and the Azhvars in the Prabandhams It is generally held that God manifests himself in various forms, but out of his mercy he has assumed and exists in five special forms. These five forms are as described below :- (१) Para Rūpa. God is believed to exist in the higher world, beyond the experience of human beings. This form of existence is often, in writings of Ramanuja, Acharyas and Āzhvārs, referred to as Nitya Vibhūti The place where God exists in this Vibhūti is called Vaikunthaloka. There he is conceived to manifest Himself as described in Vaikuntha Gadya of Ramanuja. He is believed to be invested with his weapons and ornaments, viz., Śankha, Chakra, Gada, Sarnga, Padma, Khadga, Kaustubha, Śrīvatsa and Vanamala (the conch, the discus, the mace, the bow, the lotus, the sword, the gem on his breast, a mole on his breast and a garland of flowers) In this form he is known as Para Vasudeva or Paratatva The remaining four manifestations belong to this universe and hence are included under the term Lilā Vibhūti.

(२) Vyūhas or forms assumed by God:-These manifestations of God are three in number and are called Sankarshana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. These are supposed to occupy the three Vishnulokās Amoda, Bhuvana and Pramoda forming parts of this material universe. Devas living in these worlds are said to worship them and they will continue to do so until pralayam.

४-A [[०३३]]
[[२८]]

The six divine attributes jñāna, bala, aiśvarya, śakti, tējas and vīrya are found only in Para Vasudeva or Vasudeva, the full manifestation of God. The three Vyūhas divide these qualities amongst them and so each manifestation possesses only two of these divine attributes as shown below :-Sankarshana-jñāna and bala; Pradyumnaaiśvarya and vīrya; Aniruddha-śakti and tējas. These manifestations are meant to take care of the world in its evolution and involution, to prevent evils befalling the jīvātmas whilst they are enslaved and are in bondage of samsara and to help the Bhaktas or the devoted.

Sankarshana presides over the jīvas and he is responsible for the involution of the universe; he teaches truth to the world. Creation of all pure objects and the teaching of the dharma (good law) are Pradyumna's duties; he is also the organizer of the four varṇas and he presides over" manas." Aniruddha looks after the promulgation of knowledge in the world and protecting it; he is the responsible deity for miśra śrishti (mixed creation).

(३) Vibhava Vigrahas. His incarnations in this world are known by the name Avatars. Some Avatars like Rama and Krishna are considered Sakshad Avatars or full and direct incarnations, while others are included under Amśāvatārs as in the case of Azhvārs and some world teachers.

(४) Antaryamin. God exists in atomic form in the heart of men and generally invisible. But he may become manifest when one meditates on Him with proper concentration of mind and controlling his Buddhi. Even the manifestation is believed to be like a flash of lightning in the heart of a blue cloud." The real meaning and appearance can be learnt only through initiation.

،،
(५) Archa Vigraha.--God is believed to exist in an invisible form in idols made of stone, wood, metal or even masonry. He is of the nature of intellect. God in this form can be made to enter the idols by the force of concentration and the recital of Vedas accompanied by proper rituals. So long as the idols are not polluted and as long as they are worshipped continuously the in-dwelling energy of God resides in them. The moment worship is stopped and idols are neglected or polluted this energy departs from the idols and after this they are not worthy of worship. The idols are usually made in human forms in general, but are invested with some special features such as the possession of more than two arms The idols are described in the Āgamas as follows:---" An object of stone, wood or metal, usually fashioned in the form of a human being, in which certain spiritual forces are focussed by the concentrated will-power of high initiates, for the purpose of aiding a worshipper in acquiring that stability of mind necessary to him for the contemplation of the ALL, as laid down in the Upanishads". About Archa Pillai Lokacharya says in his Arthapanchaka as follows:-"The Archa form consists in the images of Bhagavan (God) which accommodate themselves to the various tastes of His creatures, having no fixed form, but that which the worshipper may choose and desire to call Him by; all knowing, but seeming as if not knowing; all powerful, but seeming as if [[०३४]]
[[२९]]
powerless; all sufficient, but seeming as if needy; thus seeming to exchange places, the worshipped with the worshipper and choosing to be ocularly manifest to him in temples and homes, in short at all places and at all times desired." (Extract from Govindachar's translation). The Āzhvārs also voice forth the above sentiments. For example Poigai Āzhvar in the "Iyarpa" expresses the same idea in the Tamil stanza quoted below :- "तमरुगन्ददु ऎव्वुरुवम् अव्वुरुवम् ताऩे तमरुगन्ददु ऎप्पो मऱ्ऱप्पो - तमरुगन्ददु ऎव्वण्णम् सिनदित्तु इमैया तिरुप्परे अव्वण्णम् आऴि याऩाम् This in English runs as follows:--- "God with his chakra in his right hand assumes that form which is desired by his devotees; his name also will be that name which his devotees wish him to bear; he will be of that quality which his devout devotees consider him to possess whenever they think of him." In all these forms enumerated above the Vadagalais think that Śrī or Lakshmi, the Divine mother is associated with the Lord. In support of this they often quote the four slokas of Chatuśloki of Ālavandār. The Tengalais do not deny this, but say that Lakshmi has no "Vibhutvam" like God and that she is only inferior to God and belongs to the Jiva-kōtis But Vadagalais invest Lakshmi with "Vibhutvam" and she is on a par with God and not inferior in any sense.

To understand clearly the mentality of the Sri Vaishnavas as regards their conception of the Abstract Deity it is necessary to know what Ramanuja has to say in this connexion. Ramanuja holds that the human mind as it is constituted cannot conceive the Lord as an abstract essence. Such a conception is impossible to our intellectual nature and our moral nature revolts from it. He says "By concrete pictures alone is our otherwise indefinite consciousness rendered definite; in other words what is formless is by such pictures rendered into form." If God is considered to be an Absolute Being, not having any relation to things in this world, it is very difficult to think of him as being the cause; and further, for knowledge relation of things is absolutely necessary. Mere abstraction without any relationship to things cannot constitute knowledge. Constituted as we are, how can we have conception of God, devoid of all qualities and destitute of everything which makes up man's idea of Divine Being. The true and full nature of God cannot be described by our speech nor can it be visualised by symbolism. But God at the same time may be present amongst us holding personal relationship to ourselves. Personal experiences are not denied in scientific enquiries and in ordinary sense perceptions and as such they may be accepted without demur even in religious enquiries. Our conceptions of God are meant only to insist and show his relationship to us, and it is never meant to represent God's full nature. Men can conceive of God in their own form and they can only talk of him in terms of which they are capable. It is essential to think that man is only one of the so [[०३५]]
[[३०]]

many things in this Universe and he is entirely dependent on God for everything. God is not an instrument meant for the advancement of human ends. Saying that beautiful flowers and animals are created for the enjoyment of men is not true.

The Hindu thinkers bring out the sense of otherness of the Divine by the use of the negatives. "There the eye goes not, speech goes not, nor mind, we know not, we understand not, how one would teach it" (Keno-Up. ३). But the human mind finds it extremely difficult to resign itself to absolute silence or negative descriptions. Man is a talking animal.

He insists on interpreting the religious mystery in terms of his own experience. The completely other, the absolutely unlimited, seems to be akin to the utterly indefinite.

The human mind craves for something definite and limited and so uses its resources for bringing down the supreme to the region of the determined. We cannot think of God without using our imagination The religious seer needs the help of the imagination to express his vision. The highest category we can use is that of self-conscious personality.

We are persons "purushas" and God is perfect personality (uttamapurusha).

"To admit various descriptions of God is not to lapse into polytheism " (Radhakrishnan-Hindu View of Life, pages २६-२९.)