+++
title = "09 Matter or Prakṛti"

+++
According to Ramanuja prakriti also is uncreated, although there may be changes in its form. "Some texts declare a distinction of nature between non-intelligent matter, intelligent beings, and Brahman, in so far as matter is the object of enjoyment, the souls the enjoying subjects and Brahman the ruling principle 'From that the Lord of Māyā creates all this; in that the other one is bound up through the Māyā; know prakṛti to be Māyā, and the great Lord the ruler of Māyā." (S.B.E., Vol. ४८, page १४१).

Matter or Prakṛti is called Māyā. Primeval matter is in a subtle condition, which forms the totality of non-intelligent things. The prakṛti is called Māyā because it is capable of producing various wonderful effects.

"Other texts, again, aim at teaching that the highest Self to whom non-intelligent beings stand in the relation of body, and hence of modes, subsists in the form of the world, in its causal, as well as in its effected aspect and hence speak of the world in this its double aspect as that which is (the Real)." (S.B.E., ८४th Vol., page १४०)

"Matter in its subtle state subserves ends, in so far only as it is dependent on the Supreme Person who is the cause of all. We by no means wish to deny unevolved matter and all its effect in themselves, but in so far only as they are maintained not to have their Self in the Supreme Person. For the fact is that they constitute His body and He thus constitutes their Self; and it is only through this their relation to Him that the Pradhana, and so on are capable of accomplishing their several ends Otherwise the different essential natures of them all could never exist-nor persist, nor act." (S.B.E, Vol ४८, page ३५८.)

Matter like Soul is uncreated and exists from all eternity It exists in two different conditions, namely, a subtle state when it does not possess the qualities by which it is ordinarily known, when there is no distinction of individual name and form and when ५
[[०३९]]
[[३४]]

matter is unevolved (avyakta) and the gross state when it becomes associated with Souls.

The subtle state exists in the state of Pralaya when Brahman is in the causal condition (karanavastha). It is during the period of creation that matter is evolved and becomes gross. In obedience to the will of God souls enter into connexion with material bodies corresponding to the degree of merit or demerit obtained by them in previous forms of existence. God is now, along with souls and matter as his body in his effected condition (karyavastha). The existence of matter from eternity cannot be proved either by perception or inferences. The belief in its existence is dependent only on the authority of the Vedas. Compared with the Soul, prakriti is more dependent on the Lord and so has no freedom and choice of its own, like the Soul Prakriti is only an object of experience bhōgya, liable to changes and indifferent to the ends of man Smritis also maintain that Souls and Prakriti are eternal. In the Bhagavat Gita the following statements occur:- "Do thou know both Nature and the Soul to be without beginning, and know all effects and qualities to have sprung from Nature. Nature is declared to be the cause of the activity of cause and effects, whilst the soul is the cause of there being enjoyment of pleasure and pain. For the Soul abiding in Nature experiences the qualities derived from Nature, the reason being its connexion with the qualities, in its births in good and evil wombs." (Bhag. Gita. XIII, १९--२१). “Goodness, Passion and Darkness-these are the qualities which, issuing from Nature, bind in the body the embodied Soul, the undecaying one" (Bhag Gita XIV-५). "All beings at the end of a kalpa return into my Nature, and again, at the beginning of a kalpa, do I send them forth Presiding over my own Nature again and again do I send forth this vast body of beings which has no freedom of its own being subject to Nature. With me as ruler Nature brings forth all moving and nonmoving things and for this reason the world does ever go round." (Bhag. Gita, IX-७, ८, १०.)

Further on Ramanuja in his Śrī Bhashya says "that from that, १.e. from matter in its subtle causal state when it is not yet divided, the Lord of all creates the entire universe." From this statement about Creation we understand that Prakriti exists in a two-fold state according as it is either cause or effect. During a pralaya it unites itself with Brahman and abides in its subtle state, without any distinction of names and forms; it then is called the "Unevolved," and by other similar names. At the time of creation, on the other hand, there reveal themselves in Prakriti, goodness and other gunas, it divides itself according to names and forms, and then is called the "Evolved" and so on, and, transforming itself into fire, water, and earth, it appears as red, white and black. In its causal condition it is aga, १.c., unborn, in its effected condition it is caused by light, i.e., Brahman. (S.B.E. Thibaut., Vol. ४८, page ३६८.)