+++
title = "00"
+++

## Contents





*List* *of* *Images and Map * *ix* *Acknowledgments xi* *Conventions xiii* *The *Nāmam:* A Note * *xv*

1. Introduction: Setting the Stage 1 
2. Traces of Non-Brahmin Śrīvaiṣṇava Leaders 51 
3. Stories from Chennai and Beyond 94 
4. Oral Histories from Puducherry and Beyond 161 
5. Tales from Srirangam, Tanjavur and Beyond 199 
6. Śrīvaiṣṇava Brahmin Voices 227 
7. Temple Politics and the Courts 258 
8. Thinking about the Big Picture 279

*Appendix 1: Location of Places Mentioned in Interviews* 325 *Appendix 2:*āḻvārs *and Early*ācāryas 330 *Appendix 3: Changing Definitions of Caste* 332 *Appendix 4: The Colonial Cauldron of Anti-Brahmanism * 340







*Appendix 5: Śrīvaiṣṇavism’s Future?* 348 *Appendix 6: Two Nadars on Discrimination* 354

*Bibliography* 361 *Index * 377



viii







## Images and Map





Images

2.1 Non-Brahmin priest at shrine north of 

Puducherry with image of the non-Brahmin 

scholar Rāmānuja Nāvalar \(1829–91\). 56 3.1 J. N. B. Chakravarthi Ramanuja Dasar \(Chakra\) 

and his wife Mahalakshmi holding a picture 

of Chakra’s grandfather J.J.Thirunarayana 

Ramanujar Dasar \(1901–83\), a Śrīvaiṣṇava 

Dalit leader. 97 3.2 Sudarshana ‘Acarya’ leading a send-off 

procession for pilgrims going from his ashram 

in Minjur \(north of Chennai\) to Tirupati by foot. 110 3.3 Dr Parandhaman in front of his home shrine in 

Tambaram with pictures of God,āṇṭāḷ, and 

others, flanked on the side by family photographs. 148 4.1 V. Sampat Ramanuca Dasar in Sambareddy 

Palayam \(Cuddalore district\) holding a book 

with Rāmānuja’s picture, published by Aranga 

Perumal Ramanusan. 189






4.2 Dr Suganya Anandakichenin, a Śrīvaiṣṇava 

scholar, at a workshop at École Française 

d’Extrême-Orient in Puducherry. 191 5.1 The Śrīvaiṣṇava wife of the *tavil* drummer 

Needamangalam Meenakshisundaram Pillai 

and mother of Dr B. M. Sundaram \(former 

director of the music department, All India 

Radio, Puducherry\). 208 7.1 Non-Brahmin students from the villages 

studying to be priests at a school near the 

Parthasarathy temple in Chennai before 

it was closed. 266



Map

Map showing 38 districts of Tamil Nadu 324



x







## Acknowledgements





My gratitude goes to the Social Sciences and Research Council of Canada, which supported my fieldwork in India; to McGill University for making me a James McGill Professor with funding that contributed to this project over a decade; and to the Centre for Studies in Religion and Society at the University of Victoria, where I have been an Associate Fellow. 

I am especially grateful to all the people whom I inter viewed 

in Tamil Nadu, who so generously shared their experiences, memories and insights. In addition, I thank A. Pandurangan, B. M. Sundaram, Davesh Soneji and T. Janaguiraman, who travelled with me to villages and temples; Robert Inkster, who provided photographic and logistical support on one research trip; Paige Zarazun and Nicola Hayward, who typed up my field notes; Raymond B.Williams, who shared his field notes, which are now located in Wabash College Lilly Library Archives; and Srilata Raman, Paul Bramadat, and Ramesh Bairy for their astute comments on the draft. In addition, I appreciate the diligent care of the various teams at Orient BlackSwan.

Finally, I take responsibility for the interpretations offered 

here, unless attributed specifically to others.











## Conventions





Traditional Śrīvaiṣṇava works are written not only in Sanskrit, Tamil, Ma ṇ ipravāḷ am and Telugu, but they have also been printed in various scripts \(for instance, the Telugu script with its *grantha* letters has been used for Maṇipravāḷam texts\). To facilitate access to Śrīvaiṣṇavism for those who have only a general knowledge about Hinduism, I have favoured Sanskrit spellings for words that are Tamilised Sanskrit \(thus, Rāmānuja instead of Rāmānujar or Irāmānujar, or *sabhā* instead of *sabhai*, or *maṭha* instead of *maṭam* \[Tamil\]\). I give Sanskrit and Tamil equivalents on first use for key terms. 

In general, I have used standard Sanskrit and Tamil 

diacritical marks for words that appear in historicalsources, such as names of deities, technical theological and philosophical terms, and people’s names \(unless there is another standard spelling in the scholarly literature\). After the first citation of a name, I have offered shortened versions of many long names and eliminated titles to make it easier for those not familiar with these languages and subjects to read the book. I have used English spellings of names that appear in English-language sources in Tamil Nadu. In some cases where an English equivalent exists, I have used the English word. In 


addition, I have added an ‘s’ to Tamil plurals to Anglicise the word. Moreover, I have used the spellings of my informants’ names provided by them.

Because place names have changed over time, I generally 

use the name appropriate to the historical context, for example, Madras Presidency in the early twentieth century but Tamil Nadu after Indian independence, or in general comments. Because my interviewees alternated between the names of Madras or Chennai and Puducherry or Pondicherry, both appear. 

I do not use diacritical marks for caste names; rather, I 

use the version common in English language works, but have given Tamil, Telugu or Sanskrit variants in a note. Nor do I use diacritical marks for names of villages, towns and cities; for these names, I follow the spellings of place names on current Tamil Nadu maps with one exception. I use ‘T’ and not ‘Th’ in names such as Tanjavur or Tiruchirappalli. However, in Appendix 1 on the location of places, I provide variant spellings.

For the discerning eye, there will be anomalies in the use or 

non-use of diacritical marks \(for instance, the names of some organisations \(*sabhā*s\) will appear with diacritical marks but others will not, depending on my source. Words and names that are a combination of Sanskrit and Tamil may have features of both languages, as in Ekāṅgi Svāmikaḷ, where Ekāṅgi is Sanskrit and Svāmikaḷ is a Sanskrit word with a Tamil suffix. It is impossible to be absolutely systematic with the linguistic complexity of this subject matter. 



xiv







The *Nāmam*: A Note





The book cover features a Śrīvaiṣṇava mark worn by men that sanctifies the body in twelve places or just the forehead. It is called the *tirunā mam* \(sacred name\) or simply *nā mam* \(name\) because one utters the name of God when applying it. It is also called the *ūrdhva-puṇḍra*, which means a mark \(*puṇḍra*\) that rises upward \(*ūrdhva*\) and thereby signifies the spiritual upward path. The two vertical white lines symbolise the two feet of God, which means the way and the goal, but also purity, because they are white in colour. The central red mark between them, made of turmeric and vermillion \(*kuṁkum*\), signifies the Goddess \(Śrī-Lakṣmī\) and her compassionate grace. 

By extension, the *nāmam *is used to sacralise any place and 

identify its association with Śrīvaiṣṇavism. The shape of the *nāmam* with a pedestal is that of the Teṉkalai subsect; when the bottom is rounded, it signifies the Vaṭakalai subsect. Most non-Brahmin Śrīvaiṣṇavas are Teṉkalais, although some are Vaṭakalais.











one


