+++
title = "43 SrI vIrarAghva SaThakopa yatIndra mahAdeSikan"

+++

This Azhagiyasingar was the eldest son of SrI. u. vE. VidvAn ParuttippaTTu Vangeepuram Thiruvenkatacharyar of Devanarvilagam near Oppiliappan Kovil. The avatAram of this Azhagiyasingar took place in the year Plava, Kartigai month when the Poorada nakshatram was in ascendance (year 1901). The pUrvaSrama tirunAmam of this Azhagiyasingar was SrI u. vE. VidvAn Lakshminrusimhachariyar SvAmi. He passed in tarka Siromani course from Thiruvaiyaru college. Even during his younger age, his acumen and intellect were praised by elder scholars. SvAmi had rendered kAlakshpem to several disciples during his pUrvASramam. In short, this SvAmi was conducting tiruvArAdhanam and kainkaryam by treating his home as a small maTham. He used to say, "The house, garden, agricultural lands and other wealth which the others mention as mine does not belong to me. They are the property of EmperumAn Kannan only. He has appointed me as a trustee and I am performing my duties with this thought embedded in my mind". He led a selfless simple life of deep devotion and determination is performing the rituals without any compromise. He was an example to other scholars and vidvAns and was performing [[338]] the ritualistic chores five times a day without fail. He was the Principal of the Madurantakam Veda Prabandha School.

When Injimedu Azhagiyasingar had a set back to his health, as directed by him, our SvAmi took to ascetic order in the year Vikruti, 27th day of thai month on a Friday (09 February 1951). For two years, the two Azhagiayasingars together were performing ArAdhanam to SrI Lakshminrusimhan. They both stayed in Thiruvallur. After Injimedu Azhagiyasingar attained Paramapadam in the year Nandana, Masi month, SvAmi ascended the simhAsanam on 12th March 1953. He travelled widely from Setu (Thiruppullani) to Himalayas. After performing MangaLASAsanam at BadrikASramam, he returned to Rishikesh to perform the cAturmAsyam sankalpa mahotsavam. Every day at dawn, noon and dusk, taking bath in the River GangA, he used to perform ArAdhanam to SrI Lakshminrusimhan with the holy water from the River GangA. He vowed to live the life like that of sages and was eating flours only (like tinai flour).

He established Sanskrit schools at Madurantakam, Mambalam, Paadur etc,. The kaimkaryam of building the temple towers at the divya deSams of Thiruvennainallur and Pullambudankudi were done by this Azhagiyasingar. He renovated the main temple tower at Thiruvallur Temple. He got built maThams at Kadapa (Cuddapah), Vanamamalai, and Thirukottiyur. He got made of gold, the accessories such as dhUpakkAl, dIpakkAl, GaDArathi, Sanga cakra dArA (for tirumanjanam). He also got made Gold plated palanquin.

This Azhagiyasingar has written many articles in VedAntadIpikA and SrI Nrusimhapriya. This Azhagiyasingar proof read the granthams "vIkshAraNya Kshetra MahAtmyam" and "uktinishThAbharaNam" composed by AttipaTTu Azhagiyasingar and published them. After concluding the cAturmAsya sankalpam at Rishikesh, he travelled to Delhi. Thousands of disciples and devotees received the divine blessings of the Azhagiyasingar. On his return journey from Delhi, he had a set back to his health at Naimisharanya Kshetram. His health further deteriorated and he attained Paramapadam in the year Hemalamba, Kartigai month 9th, Sukla paksha trutIyai, Sunday (24 November 1957). His Brundavanam is at Naimisharanyam. This Azhagiyasingar has the distinction of taking up sancAram like none other before him in a period of about one hundred years.

His AsthAna nirvAka kAlam - 5 years, 10 months


[[339]] taniyan श्रीमच्छ्रीरङ्गपृथ्वीश्वरशठरिपुणा संयमीन्द्रेण दृष्टं न्यस्तात्मानं नृसिंहे नरहरिशठजिद्योगिनेतुः प्रसादात् ।
प्राज्ञश्रीरङ्गकारिप्रभवयतिपतेः प्राप्तलक्ष्मीनृसिंहा- स्थानं सेवे यतीन्द्रं सकलगुणनिधिं वीरररघ्वीट्-शठारिम् ॥
SrImat SrIrangaprthvIshvaraSaTharipuNA samyamIndreNa drshTam nyastAtmAnam nrsimhe narahariSaThajityoginetuH prasAdAt | prAjn~a-SrirangakAriprabhavayatipateH prAptalakshmI nrsimha AsthAnam seve yatIndram sakalaguNanidhim vIrararaghvIT-SaThArim || **** [[340]]
