+++
title = "१८ मोक्षयिष्यामि"
+++
<details><summary>English</summary>

THE MEANING OF THE WORD MOKṢAYIṢYĀMI (I WILL SET THEE FREE)   page595
</details>

<details><summary>Español</summary>

EL SIGNIFICADO DE LA PALABRA MOKṢAYIṢYĀMI (TE HARÉ LIBRE) página 595
</details>



The word mokṣayishyami 'I will set thee free from all sins means "I will grant thee release (from the bondage of saṁsāra) at the time when you want it".



It may be asked :--"(ln another context) the. Lord says, “I will never pardon". Is it not opposed to what is stated here viz. "I will set thee free from all sins?"; therefore this should be merely to give a little seeming comfort in words and is not to be taken literally." The answer to this question is as follows:--

• There is no conflict between these two statements for they apply to different cases. "I will not forgive" occurs in the śloka : “Though a man adores me with a hundred lotuses, O Goddess of the earth, whichever  devotee of Viṣṇu touches blood even unawares I will not pardon him. I will never pardon his offence, O Goddess of the Earth, even if he tries to show me a hundred marks of reverent attention (upacāra)". It only means  "I will not forgive the man for such trivial forms of expiation (as the offering of lotuses and external marks of attention). Here in the Caramaśloka, the word mokṣayiṣyami (means “I will forgive all (offences) if the man adopts the particular upāya which is an atonement for all sins.” The intention of the Saviour is expressed indeed in the śloka :---"Be it Vibhīṣaṇa or Rāvaṇa himself, bring him here, O Sugrīva. I will grant him pardon." These words are not seeming-pleasant, for there is no conflict between what is stated (in Varāhapurāṇam) and what is stated in the Gita, as they apply to different situations. If they are to be taken as only seeming-pleasant, all the texts in the Śāstras which enjoin bhakti  and prapatti would be void of authority,



Here “Releasing from sins " means Iśvara giving up His intention to punish the sinner for having violated His commands from beginningless time. By this turning away (of Iśvara) from the thought of punishment, the effects of His punishment, such as avidyā or ignorance, would all cease to exist. Iśvara's turning away from the thought of punishment means His will which takes the form: “By my grace will the man who performs all his duties as for me and as being done by me attain the world that is eternal". The cessation of such things as avidyā in the jīva means the expansion of intelligence, knowledge, wisdom and such others.



The manner and the order in which the causes of saṁsāra, which are of the nature of puṇya and papa will disappear are as follows - The hindrances to the adoption of the upāya have disappeared already by their respective causes (such as the performance of the rites and duties of varṇas and āśramas), then the puṇyas and papas done before the adoption of the upāya which are opposed to the attainment (of mukti) will disappear without any trace at the beginning of the adoption of the upāya, provided they are not such as have already begun to yield their fruit (prarabdha). Among sins committed after prapatti, those offences which may be committed without any awareness of them and which are the result of unfavourable conditions of place, time and the like will not in the least taint (the self). Those offences which are committed deliberately when there is no danger of death will cease either by some form of atonement or expiation which is within the man's power or by experiencing the fruit of the karma  which would be of the nature of a light punishment. That portion of the karma  which has begun to yield its fruit to the prapanna that will have to be experienced within the time desired by him (for mukti) will disappear either by the experience or enjoyment of the fruit or by an intervening rite of expiation. That which remains will disappear by the potency of the upāya (prapatti).



Among those good deeds (puṇya) which are done deliberately with thought both (of mokṣa and of saṁsāra), such as are not hindrances and such good deeds (puṇya) done before and after the adoption of the upāya by the upasaka as are capable of strengthening his vidyā or Meditation -- these will disappear after having yielded their fruit. Those good deeds (puṇya) done before and after the adoption of the upāya (namely, upāsana) which are of no use to the meditation or vidyā and which have been prevented from yielding their fruit and those good deeds, done before and after, which are useful for the meditation but which have had no occasion to yield their fruit owing to the superior strength of (other) karma  favourable for the meditation and unfavourable for it and which still remain without yielding their fruit - these too, will disappear in the last moments of the man's life. This truth is expressed in the sütra "By the same principle, the deeds, too, which are other than sinful will not stain (the self)." Those good deeds (which are the cause of rain, food and the like which are necessary for the performance of the vidyā) will cease to exist immediately after the fall of the body".



Since those good deeds which were performed solely for pleasing the Lord and which were merely of the nature of service have already yielded their fruit, there is no need to speak about their staining the self. Those deeds which were performed by the man for setting an exanıple to the rest of the world (lokasaṅgraha) had to be performed as commands of the Lord. They are of the nature of pure kaiṅkarya or service and have already given their fruits. Among them, if any such good deeds were done without the renunciation of egoism (sātvikatyāga) out of carelessness, they, too, would amount to sins as stated in the śloka "Tapas is no sin, the study of the Veda is no sin, the rites and duties prescribed for each man are no sins, nor is the earning of money by hard work for their sake a sin. If these very things are done with a wrong intention with the thought, “I am doing this and doing this for myself", they become sinful". These (sins) will become subject to the release promised in mokṣayiṣyāmi. Those prapattis that were performed for other ends (than mukti) must have already yielded their fruit.



For the sake of the end for which a former prapatti was performed, a second or further prapatti ought not to be performed, as it would be inconsistent with the potency of prapatti and with the intense and great faith with which the first prapatti was performed. If one were to perform more than one prapatti for the sake of a single end in view, it would be like adopting another upāya (and there would be need for atonement).



The disappearance or destruction of past karma  means Iśvara's giving up the thought of awarding the person the fruit thereof. When karma  is said not to stain or taint the self (aśleṣa), it means that the thought of awarding the fruit or consequence of the karma  in the case of those who have sought His protection does not even arise in Iśvara.



If it be asked, “(It is stated in the śrutis that the good deeds and the bad deeds of the man who is to obtain mukti will be distributed among his friends and his foes respectively (at the last moment of his life). If good deeds and bad deeds for past karna) are all destroyed in the manner described above, how can this distribution take place ?" The answer is: The distribution among foes and friends will be, respectively, of those evil deeds which are said not to taint and to be destroyed, (aśleṣa and vināśa) and those good deeds (puṇya) which are done deliberately after the adoption of the upāya and which have been prevented from yielding their fruit by stronger karma . (It is said in the śrutis) that Iśvara distributes these among the man's friends and foes at the time of his death, Why should Iśvara wait until the time of the man's death for this distribution, when He could as well have done so, at the very beginning when the man adopted the upāya ?" The answers to these questions are as follows: "A man may have behaved with favourable intentions towards the devotee at first, but later he may change and behave with evil intentions. In such circumstances the good deeds should not have already been given away to the friend (who has afterwards turned foe). Further the Lord desires to give opportunities to foes who have done evil to the devotee to beg for forgiveness. These are the reasons why Iśvara does not effect the transfer of the good and the bad karma  until the last moments of the devotee.



The good deeds done by a man for the sake of such ends as svarga are, to the aspirant for mukti, of the nature of sins (papa).. Hence such good deeds (of the devotee) will not be transferred to his friend, if the latter is an aspirant for mukti.



It may be asked,  "What is the meaning of transferring the karma s performed by one man to some others?" The answer is as follows:---"The punishment or reward which Iśvara intended to award to those who performed these karma s is now transferred to his foes and friends in equal measure," It may be asked, “If punishments and rewards for the karmas performed by one man are to be awarded to some other man or men, would there not be too wide an application (atiprasaṅga) (i.e.) the punishment does not go to the evildoer but to somebody else who has not done evil. It is also against the principle that he who sowed must reap the harvest". The answer is this:- There will be no such unfairness due to too wide an application (atiprasaṅga), because the rewards and punishments are awarded in accordance with the obligations or offences done, respectively, by these friends and foes to the aspirant for mukti. That is why it is nowhere stated that these good deeds and bad deeds are transferred to those who are neither friends nor foes. The word 'transfer’ is used here in the sense that (their friends and foes) will have fruits similar to those of the karmas said to be transferred. This śruti which speaks of the transfer of good and bad deeds suggests the extreme of pleasure and displeasure that the Lord would feel, if the obligations and offences are done to the jñānī (the man of wisdom) who is extremely dear to the Lord.

If we take the *[^f1] interpretation given in the śloka (on page ), sarva pāpebhyah (from all sins) would briefly include, as desired by the man, all hindrances to the attainment of the Lord, all hindrances to the proper adoption of the upāya and also the causes of experiencing disagreeable things.



Here the hindrance to the attainment of the Lord is the Lord's will that the offender shall not enjoy Him. The hindrance to the upāya is the Lord's will that the offender shall not understand Him aright and do what is necessary to propitiate Him. The causes of experiencing disagreeable things consist in the will of God that the man shall experience the consequences or fruits of doing such karmas as displeased Him.



If all punishments are cancelled in the case of the aspirant for mukti, the effects of such punishments, namely, contact with acit and the like will stand cancelled by the Lord's grace which cancelled the punishments. Thereafter since there are no causes, there will be no such effects as disagreeable experiences. This is indicated in the sūtra: "The man who has attained  mokṣa will never return to saṁsāra, for the śrutis say so", These conclusions are within the reach of the knowledge of those very wise men who have studied Śrī Bhāṣya for a long time along with the traditions of the good.



Thus (the words) "I will release thee from all sins" speak of the removal of the stream of all hindrances which are of the nature of either causes (the Lord's will to punish) or effects (avidyā and the like); it means the same thing as saying that the self will (then) have the manifestation (āvirbhāva) of the perfect enjoyment of Bhagavān. For Bhagavan Śaunaka says:-"When the dirt is washed away, the gem shines of itself, but the sheen is not newly produced. In the saine way, when the self casts off its blemishes or faults, jñāna is not newly created in it (for it is already there). When a tank is dug, water and space are not newly created. What is already present is now brought to manifestation. How can a thing which did not exist before arise anew? So by the casting off of evil qualities, good qualities like jnūna shine forth. They are not newly produced, for it has been stated (in the śāstras) that they are eternal qualities of the self". Since the substance called jñāna or knowledge and its inherent power to cover all objects are both eternal, the right word to use is 'manifestation' (i.e.) it is used in its primary sense.





(It is true that) the expansion of jñāna or knowledge to cover all objects, the freedom from pain, sorrow and the like. The will to do what is good and other such things and the forms of service or kaiṅkarya arise anew. Still as their origin depends on the conditional factor (upādhi), namely, the removal of hindrances thereto, the word 'manifestation' (āvirbhāva) is used in such places as the performance of different kinds of service which are natural to myself manifest itself." This is in order to show that when the hindrances disappear, these services will automatically follow. (In the state of saṁsāra), the objects (in the Universe) which are all the glorious possessions of Bhagavān appear disagreeable in various ways or (only) slightly agreeable as a result of the conditioning factor (upādhi), namely, karma . In the state of mokṣa, they would all become agreeable (since karma  has disappeared), as agreeableness is their natural quality. Therefore in that state, too, the word 'manifestation' (of agreeableness) may justly be used. Therefore the words "I will release thee from all sins"make it evident that the self will have a new state in which all things will manifest their natural agreeableness to it.



If the word ekam means the identity of the upāya and the upeya or the end of attainment (as has already been indicated), this attainment of the desired end is also made plain. Therefore the idea that was expressed clearly in the śloka (Gītā - 18 - 65), namely “Thou wilt come to me" may be considered to be stated in the carama śloka (also) by the meaning implicit in the word ekam, and by the statement that the hindrances to that attainment are destroyed ----(I will release thee from all sins). Therefore the carama-śloka cannot be said to supplement or explain what has been stated in the preceding śloka.[^f2] *



Here an objection that has no soundness in it may be raised to this effect:-"When it is said "I will release thee from all sins", does it follow from those words alone that the release from sins would lead to the attainment of Bhagavān stated in "Thou wilt reach me?" Is it not possible that, with the removal or pardon of all sins, the self may attain the state called kaivalya in which it enjoys only itself without attaining Bhagavān ? That there is a state called kaivalya, has, it is well known, been declared in such treatises as Nāradīya kalpam, where we find the śloka :-- "This mantra enables a man to obtain wealth and lordship in this world, svarga and the like in the world beyond, kaivalya (the enjoyment of one's own self) and the enjoyment of Bhagavān". Aḷavandār also says " To those who desire to have wealth and lordship, the enjoyment of their own self dissociated from the body and, likewise, the performance of kaiṅkarya or service at the feet of the Lord etc. etc." He says also (elsewhere):  Without the grace  of Lakṣmī, the beloved consort of the Lord with the lotus eyes, we cannot have the valuable things desired (by men) in saṁsāra, the enjoyment of the disembodied self (in kaivalya) and the enjoyment of Bhagavān". In the Gadya, also, is found quoted (the sentence) in Jitante stotra - “Leaving all desired pleasures and the enjoyment of the (disembodied) self, I have reached Thy feet." This truth is also stated at length in Śrī Rāmānuja's GitāBhāṣya and such other writings. Therefore should not the freedom from all sins which results from the statement "I will release thee from all sins" be considered common to kaivalya and the enjoyment of Bhagavan ?".



The objection (stated so far) is unsound for the following reasons:- " If all sins have disappeared, there is no reason why the self should be without the experience of Bhagavān, which is its natural and inherent right. Therefore the state of the enjoyment of the mere self (kaivalya) without the enjoyment of Bhagavān would not be the goal of attainment then. Hence in that state (kaivalya), (we should understand that) the karma s which produce wealth, and such sufferings as old age and death have disappeared but that the karma  which is a hindrance to the perfect enjoyment of Bhagavān has not yet been destroyed. This state (of kaivalya) is a particular kind of enjoyment which consists in the experience of one's own disembodied self. Of this state it has been said :-"lo that experience of the self, the self feels that there is nothing greater than it", and also, “If a man desires! this enjoyment of the (disembodied) self, these three (karma  yoga, jñāna yoga and bhakti  yoga) will enable him to attain that extreme which is called kaivalya". As stated (in these ślokas), this experience in which there is neither contact with acit or matter nor enjoyment of Bhagavān and which results from the adoption of a particular upāya within the man's ability was called kaivalya, because it is the enjoyment of the mere (kevala) self without association with either acit or Bhagavān. qq604



(In some places) mukti or the attainment of Bhagavān is called by the word kaivalya in order to show that all upādhis or conditioning factors have ceased to exist in mukti. So also the word mukti is sometimes employed to denote the experience of the disembodied self as in the śloka "O, Lord of Hastigiri," I look upon all the enjoyments of this world, the title of Brahma, the high position of Rudra, and the experience of the disembodied self, which is called mukti - I look upon these as water poured in the soil saturated with salt. I know the bliss of rendering service to Thee". The word mukti employed here should be explained as in the śloka :- " The man who is free from desire, fear and anger - he is always a mukta (aven here in saṁsāra). It only means "He resembles a mukta". It may be asked "Is it (kaivalya) not stated to be freedom from old age, and death ? " The answer is that it is just like calling the gods immortal (amara), (That is : they are not truly immortal.) Compared

with human beings, they may be said to be relatively immortal, for they live much longer. Or it may be explained as stating that kaivalya will lead, in course of time, to mukti. In the same way should be explained the use of the word mukti when it is intended to mean merely the attainment of the same abode or loka as that of [^f3] the vibhavas or vyuhas and also samipya and sārūpya.

[^f3]: Note (2)




It has been declared that real mukti is different from the others in the (following) śloka:-"Some live  in the worlds of Viṣṇu. This is sālokyam (living in the same loka or world as Viṣṇu). Some reach near Him. This is sāmipyam (attaining a place near Viṣṇu). Some others attain a form resembling that of Viṣṇu. This is sārupyam (having a form resembling His). Others still attain sayujyam and it is this which goes by the name mokṣa". The sayujyam referred to here is going to Paramapada and enjoying the same bliss as that of Bhagavān (and this alone is real and true mukti). That the experience of the mere disembodied self is not eternal and that it is not real mokṣa are evident from these ślokas :- "There are four kinds of people who are mine and who are called my devotees. Among them, those who are exclusively attached to me (ekantins) are the best, for they worship no other deities. To these men who perform their duties and rites without any attachment or desire for their fruit. I am alone the goal. The other three virtuous kinds of bhaktas or devotees are said to be desirous of certain ends. All these (three) are liable to fall (from their high state) but the jnani (who is an ekāntin attains mokṣa " (Again it is said) : " Having  listened to this story, the man who has lost his wealth will become free from the sorrow due to it; the man (jijnasu) who wants to enjoy his disembodied self will attain bhakti  or devotion (to the Lord), the bhakta or devotee will attain mokṣa". This amounts to stating that the jijnasuh spoken of in the Gita, who is desirous of experiencing his self, will, in course of time, become a jnani. It has been said :- “When the attachment to the pleasures of life ceases, the self, which is different from the body and which is happy, will become manifest. Without being caught (in this state) viz, kaivalya, if you want to realise that your essential nature consists in being śeṣa to Bhagavān and in being eternal, get hold of Bhagavān and then give up the pleasures of worldly objects." In this (Tamil verse) the enjoyment of Bhagavān is said to be eternal and the experience of the disembodied self, which is distinguished fronı it, is indirectly stated to be not eternal. (It is true that) the experience of the measureless self is described as imperishable or without changes like diminution or increase; - like the statement of the fruit of the rite called cāturmāsya being imperishable; it only means that it will last for a very long time (i.e.) many and many a kalpa (and not that it is eternal). This locality where the self enjoys itself is thus described :-- " The place called the amṛtam of yogis is the place to which those who want to enjoy their own self go." That this locality is not Paramapada is also evident from another siloka in the very same context: "Those who are yogins and who, being ekāntins, are constantly meditating on Brahman, reach that supreme abode which the eternal suris are gazing at. (It is clear from this, that the ekāntin who is desirous of attaining Bhagavān is here stated to go to a place other than that (to which the man who is desirous of enjoying his self would go) and that it is a place gazed at by the suris,



In such treatises as Śrī Bhāṣya (and GitāBhāṣya ) it has been stated that those who meditate on their self with Brahman as its inner self as in Pañcāgni-vidyā and the like pass (after death) along the arcirādi route and attain Brahman.



Therefore to those that meditate on their self according to the Pañcāgni vidyā, there is an intermediate result or experience consisting in the enjoyment of the mere self. However, according to the principle explained in the madhu vidyā, they will ultimately attain Brahman. If, however, the meditation is on the self either as associated with prakṛti or matter or as disembodied or dissociated from matter, whether the self is meditated on in its essential nature (svarūpa) or as if it were Brahman, -- in all these four cases, as when name (nāma) and the like are meditated on as if they were (Brahman), there is neither the passage along the arcirādi route for the attainment of Brahman. This is declared in the following :-- Bādarāyana is of opinion that the Ativāhikās (escorts) lead those who do not meditate on pratikas (i.e.) parts or aspects (of Brahman). In either of the other alternatives, there is conflict (with the śrutis) and also with the principle of tat-kratu. In another context to prove that the being meditated on in that vidyā is (not the jīva (but) the Supreme Being or Brahman, the Sūtrakāra gives this as his reason for saying so: "Since the person who meditates according to this vidyā is said to pass along the archirādi route.” This is done in the sūtra “since  mention[^f4] *  is made of the route meditated on by those who have listened to the Upaniṣads” (i.e.) to those who meditate on Brahman.

[^f4]: Note (3)




Therefore to those who do not attain Brahman, there should not have been the cancellation of all sins spoken of in the carama śloka. To those whose sins have been pardoned or cancelled, there is no limitation in regard to the enjoyment of Brahman, Thus since in this śloka, the annulment of all sins is declared, (we have to understand that) even that particular karma  which resulted in the experience of the mere self and which stood as a hindrance to the fall and perfect enjoyment of Brahman is annulled or cancelled. From this it would follow that what is stated in the previous śloka namely, " 'Thou wilt attain myself” is declared in this śloka also mām eva eṣyasi. "Thou wilt attain myself" means "the full and perfect enjoyment of Brahman'. In order that this perfect enjoyment may happen, the archirādi route has to be traversed and a particular region or locality has also to be reached.



It is clear from the śāstras which speak of such things as this route that, from beginningless time, the independent and omnipotent Lord has made it a rule that the full and perfect enjoyment (of Himself) should be granted in this order (namely, the archiridi route, the entrance into the region or locality and then the enjoyment).



Before starting on the archirādi route, when a man understands the essential nature (svarūpa) of Brahman with the help of the śāstras and so also when he has a vision of Brahman with the help of yoga and when he reaches such worlds as those of *[^f5] Vibhava, the vision or realisation which he gets results from some specific good deeds and is dependent on the instruments of knowledge. Therefore this vision will be partial or limited and liable to interruption. But the vision that results in the state of mukti is full and perfect, because there are no factors that limit or diminish the experience nor is it liable to any further interruption or break, As an Overflow (parivāha) of this enjoyment arises the perfect service or kaiṅkarya in which the śeṣī (the Lord) finds delight and this idea is expressed in the śloka: "Though you live for a hundred years, I will always be your servant. Therefore give me orders saying . " Do this in this beautiful place." Here all the successive stages of realisation (or fruit) which are stated (by Śrī Rāmānuja , in the (Śaraṇāgati) Gadya in the sentence with the word pāramarthika are also implicitly suggested in accordance with the pramāṇas.

[^f5]: 1.


