+++
title = "१० ISVARA SIDDHI"
+++

In order to establish the truth that the universe runs its course under the control of some one person, let us. at the very outset, state the *prima facie* view on the matter. 

### THE MIMAMSAKA VIEW 

In regard to this question, the Mimāmsakas say -A person endowed with the capacity to perceive all things directly cannot be posited: for such a person is beyond the reach of all the pramāņas that could possibly help to prove his existence; (besides) there are several conclusive means of proof running counter to belief in such a person To make the matter clear-(It may be asked) is it perception or some other pramāņa that proves [[h's|his]] existence? (If the reply is: perception, there is the further question) is it ordinary perception *(laukika-pratyakṣa*) or super-normal perception (*yaugika pratyakṣa*)? 

### Laukikapratyakṣa cannot prove the existence of God 

The objects of ordinary perception being specific for each of the senses and being limited (to the *here* and now), it cannot serve to prove the existence of the supreme soul; for, with its' aid, all objects (without an exception), knowledge concerning them, and so on, cannot be apprehended, The instrument of knowledge which could [[reval|reveal]] a person endowed with the capacity to perceive everything must necessarily have for its object (1) all things, notwithstanding their distance, their time of existence and nature, and notwithstanding the factors obstructing their apprehension, (2) knowledge concerning all these, and (3) the capacity to have this knowledge. When it is impossible even to think of such an illimitable greatness ever becoming the object of ordinary [[preception|perception]], which operates as a rule (according to the specific capacities of the different senses) in certain objects [[whieh|which]] are capable of coming into contact with the senses at the time, how could we imagine ordinary perception to be the effective means of proving the existence of a person (endowed with such greatness)? 

[[P136]]

### Nor could yoga pratyakşa prove the existence of God. 

Nor could the perception of the yogin be a means of proving his existence. For. if it is a mode of perception, it too can only reveal present objects. Were it to comprehend objects, past and future, it would, like intuitive insight (*pratibhā*), scarcely be perception. Besides, (there arises the question) is the knowledge of the yogin born of the senses or not? Even on the view that it is sensory knowledge, there crops up the further question, is that knowledge born of the outer senses or of the internal sense? It cannot originate from the outer senses: for it is well-known that the outer senses, provided with the auxiliary causes, namely, contact with the objects appropriate thereto, give rise to knowledge concerning those object. That is why there is no possibility of knowledge concerning all things, (e. g.) silver, bygone objects, and whatever is screened from view arising from the senses, such as, the tongue. With objects, such as silver, that do not exist at the moment, there can be no contact presupposes two bases, and in the absence of either basis, there is no possibility of contact. Therefore, contact with objects is required (for perception arising from the outer senses). When the auxiliary cause is absent, how would the senses be capable of directly apprehending objects, such as by-gone things? 

This may be expressed in syllogistic form :-That which produces a certain effect, when in association with a given auxiliary cause, cannot produce it in the absence of that auxiliary cause; for example, the seed which produces the sprout, when in association with the soil and moisture, does not produce the same in the absence of soil and the like The external senses, in association with the auxiliary cause, namely contact with objects, lead to knowledge. Therefore, in conformity with this principle. the outer senses do not also lead to knowledge of the past object or the future one. It has, therefore, to be concluded that the knowledge generated by the external senses cannot override the rule herein [[mcntioned|mentioned]] with regard to objects (that they should be present at the time, unclouded and appropriate to the senses). 

Nor can it (i.e., the knowledge of the yogin) originate from the internal sense. For it is only in the domain of pleasure and othe 

[[P137]]

internal states that the mind holds complete sway. If even in regard to knowledge of external objects the manas were admitted to be the unfettered and unaided instrument, then, the outer senses would become superfluous. It would follow therefrom that none could be either blind or deaf. 

To express it in syllogistic form :-Without seeking the assistance of the outer organs manas, whose precise mode of apprehending exter- nal objects is under dispute, cannot enter upon the province of external perception: for in regard to this field the activity of manas is dependent upon the outer senses. That whose activity in a certain sphere is dependent upon a given entity cannot act in that sphere independent of that given entity; for example, the eye, whose proper functioning is dependent upon light, does not operate in its province, (viz., that of colour) in darkness. 

### Impossible even for the senses that have acquired supernormal powers through drugs, charms, austerities and yogic concentration to establish the existence of God 

It is impossible for the senses even occasionally to transcend the limitations which are known to prevail with regard to the object by virtue of the merit acquired through the efficacy of the drugs administer- ed by perfected souls, of mantras (charms). austerities (*rapas)* and yogic concentration. For these (ie., drugs, etc.) have for their result only the manifestation of the capacity inherent in the different senses; and this capacity is well-defined (for each of them). Though the ear may have acquired excellent powers through a hundred drugs properly administered, yet it is incapable of apprehending such diverse qualities as colour and taste. 

To put the matter in syllogistic form:-The excellence of the skill belonging to the senses, external and internal, concerning which there is dispute, does not transcend its limits or bounds; for it is sensory excellence like the one perceived by us. Hence, sensory knowledge cannot make known bygone things and the like. 

[[P138]]

### Yogic concentration even of the end stage incapable of proving God. 

Though the knowledge that arises at the culmination of the highest stages of concentration shines forth clearly and distinctly, whether it sets forth something additional to what is revealed in previous experience or embraces nothing more than that. such a knowledge has to whirl in the eddy of the one or the other of the two streams of remembrance (*smrti)* and illusion *(vibhrama*), and has no chance whatever of reaching the shore of validity (prāmāṇya). There is much less chance of trying to enchance its validity by stating that, it is perceptual knowledge. If it were a perception, how could it transcend the well-known limitations with regard to objects? If it were to transcend these, how could it still be perceptual in character? Hence, perception cannot be a valid means of proof in regard to the person endowed with superhu.nan power of experiencing all things. 

### No pramāņa other than perception is competent either to prove the ex- istence of God. 

It cannot be any other pramāņa either. (If it be) is that other pramāņa infernce or scripture (agama)? If it is inference, is that viseṣatodṛṣṭa or sāmānyat dṛṣṭa? (It cannot be vises *nodṛṣṭa*; for) concerning the existence of God, who is beyond the reach of all the means of proof, no inference can arise; since the birth of the latter is dependent upon the assurance of universal concomitance (avinābrāva*)* between the hetu and the sadhya, which, in its turn, presupposes the direct perception of what is proved. Indeed, those who are ignorant of fire would be incapable of understanding smoke as a universal conconi- tant of fire. Nor is a mark of inference (Ing 1) of the sa nanyatodṛṣṭa variety available in inferring the existence of a person who is competent to create all things and to perceive them directly. 

### THE NYAYA ARGUMENTS FOR THE EXISTENCE OF GOD. 

The world, concerning which the question is raised:-Is it, or is it not, due to divine creation?-is subservient to a single intclligent entity; for. like the body of one who is free from disease, it is constituted of non-sentient matter. Further, as the world is an effect, the ability 

[[P139]]

to create all things and perceive them directly must be inferred to belong to its author. 

Indeed. all effects such as pots, water-jars and houses are found to be created by intelligent beings who know the material and the auxili- ary causes and also know for whom and for what purpose they are intended[^139_1]. The objects under discussion, such as the earth, the moun- tain and the wide ocean, are effects; hence it has to be concluded that they, too, have for their cause an intelligent entity. 

[^139_1]: 1. Compare Pāņinis sütra-karmaņa yamabhipraiti sa sampradānam. I. iv. 32. 

It cannot be contended that their being effects is itself unestablishd for this is well established on the strength of reasons such as the arrangement of the parts. All objects, commencing from wholes which are not themselves the parts of other wholes (*antyāvayavi*) and ending with the diads *(dvvaṇukas*), are known to be constituted by the peculiar combinations of diverse parts which decrease (in number) in accordance with the scale of wholes; hence it follows that ultimately four different kinds of infinitesimal atoms are the material causes of the world. As for the auxiliary cause *(upakaraṇa*), it must be the unseen powers (adṭsta) in the shape of merit *(*dharma) and demerit *(adharma*) existing in all individual souls *(*kṣetrajña) for the initial movement *(parispanda*) of the infinitesimal atoms has for its non-inherent cause (asamavāyikārana) their conjunction with the manifold souls associated with unseen powers in the form of merit and demerit *(adṛṣṭa*) which are appropriate to this movement. As regards the purpose (of creation), it is the limitless and manifold forms of help rendered to the jivas, a help which is in the shape of diverse, fruitful activities performed by them. The self-same jivas who derive this help are the very persons for whom *(sampradāna*) the universe is intended. For the reason that these jivas are incapable of perceiving the merits and demerits even though they are inherent in themselves, why should it not be inferred with the aid of a mark of inference *(linga*) of the sāmānyatodṛṣṭa variety that there is a Supreme Porson, who as understood from the *Adhikaraṇa*-*siddhanta*, is different from these finite souls, who is competent to create all the worlds, who is endowed with a knowledge 

[[P140]]

of all things, which is of the most excellent kind and which is natural to him, and who is endowed with lordship and power of unsurpassed excellence. 

### THE MĪMĀMSAKA CRITICISM OF THE NAIYAYIKA VIEW 

The Mimāmsakas ridicule this line of thought as being the out- come of arguments which are unsustainable and which are framed by the imagination of one who is ignorant of the methods of inference. To make the matter clear-What is the precise significance of the statement that the body, the world and the like are subservient to a single conscious entity? If it is said that it signifies dependence upon that entity. (it may be asked) what is it that is dependent upon him? Is it their origin or continuance or activity? On the first two alternatives, the illustrative example cited would be defective in not possessing the *sadhya.* Indeed, the body is not dependent for its origin and continuance upon a single intelligent entity. All persons who share in the enjoyment of the pleasures and pains dependent upon a given body must also, equally with the person who owns it, be responsible for its origin and continuance; since they are endowed with unseen powers (adṛṣṭa*)* appropriate to that enjoyment. 

The continuance of a complex whole like that of the body, which is in the form of the inherence of the whole in its parts, requires no intelligent being apart from the peculiar inter-relation of the parts themselves. Continuance, understood in the sense of breathing, which stands in need of an intelligent person, is not met with in the earth and the like, which are offered as the *pakṣa* (minor term) in your argument; hence we fail to discern a uniform type of continuance existing in com- mon in both the minor term *(*paks 1) and the illustrative example *(sapakşa)*. 

Should it be said that dependence' means having an activity subject to the control of a single intelligent entity, then, in consideration of instances like huge boulders or trees or cars which could be moved only with the strenuous effort put forth by several strong persons, the 

[[P141]]

argument is liable to be charged with the fallacy of *vyabhicāra*. Again, when the conclusion (namely, that the world presupposes an intelligent cause) follows from the very fact of the cosmos being constituted of (matter), the addition of the qualification 'endowed with a knowledge of the material cause and so on' is superfluous. 

### The argument proves what is already proven 

If the [[aegument|argument]] were to establish only dependence upon a conscious entity, then, the arugument is liable to be charged with the defect of proving what is already well-established; for this world has been created by our own past deeds *(*karma) as something fit for enjoyment by conscious beings, experiencers *(bhoktā*). It is proper to admit that the agency for the creation of the world belongs only to the conscious beings posited by both the rival disputants, for this hypothesis has the merit of economy of thought *(lāghava)*. 

It is impossible to deny agency to finite souls, on the score that they are not acquainted with the material cause and the like. For all intelligent beings are quite competent to perceive directly the material causes, namely, the elements like earth, and the auxiliary causes such as sacrifice (yajña) and gift *(dāna*). 

Direct perception of the infinitesimal atoms which are the ultimate building materials is not required for agency; because earth and other elements possessing at all times, as at the present moment, partial growth and decay which take place occasionally and gradually, do not secure at any time total annihilation or creation. 

(It is futile to contend that as *yaga* and dāna become the causes of creation only through the mystic power *(*apūrva) which they generate and as this power is imperceptible to the jiva, he cannot be the agent; for) the mystic potency of activities which is referred to by terms, such as *‘apūrva',* may not be perceptible; but, surely, the act itself possessing this power is open to perception. In fact, the potter and other agents engaged in producing objects, such as jars, do not enter upon their 

[[P142]]

respective activities only after having directly perceived the potency to produce the effect residing in their material and auxiliary causes, such as, the lump of clay and the wheel. However, in producing objects that are desired, the utilisation of their respective material causes would be impossible to those who are altogether ignorant of their potency. But here, the manifold potencies of activities are learnt through scriptures Therefore, let it be held that finite souls severally are the agents in creating everything in the world with the aid of their own deeds. 

### The Mimamsaka objection that since the earth, the ocean etc cannot be made, they cannot be said to have a cause. 

Moreover, only that which it is possible to make. and whose material cause can possibly be known. is found everywhere to have a conscious being for its agent. For the reason that the earth, the mountain and the mighty ocean do not possess this nature (ie, it is impossible to make them, and their material cause cannot to known). it is difficult to imagine how they can be regarded as the respective effects of different causes. It is even more difficult to conceive how their material and auxiliary causes could become the objects of direct perception. Only an effect like the jar or the water-po, which is known to be dependent upon an intelligent entity acquainted with material and other causes, is capable of leading to the inference that an effect must have for its cause a sentient being possessing a knowledge of that kind' (i.e., knowledge of *upādāna, upakaraṇa* and the like.) 

### Your argument would only establish the reverse of what you seek 10 prove i.e. it would not prove an omniscient Lord buronly a finite individual. 

Further, in as much as an effect like the jar is known to be produced by a person who is different from God and who possesses limited powers and knowledge and who is endowed with a personality. and who has desires which are unfulfilled, the reason (*hetu*) cited by you, establishing as it does a kno.ver answering to this description, is able to be charged with *viruddha doșa*. For it establishes the very reverse of ommiscience and lordship.over the universe which is sought 

[[P143]]

to be proved as belonging to the person who is suggested to be the cause of the world. 

(The Mimāmsaka continues :)-There is no room for the objec- tion that if this were so there would be an end to all reasoning. For, if the thir g proved *(lingin*) is open to any *pramāņa* other than that on which it is at the moment based, this other pramāṇa itself would dispel the contradictory features suggesting themselves on the strength of the mark of inference *(*linga). In the present case, however, when a person who transcends the reach of all other pramaņas and who is competent to create all things is desired to be proved, the reason *(hetu*) will, in addition to proving him, establish also all those features which possess invariable concomitance ascertained on the strength of positive and negative evidence. 

### The possibility of proving the precisely opposite conclusion i. e. that the world is not created. 

The activities of a person in his senses are always invariably characterised by thought of personal gain or love to others. Since, in the case of God, none of these exists, the creation of the world cannot justifiably be ascribed to him. As all his desires are already fulfilled, he does not create the world for his own sake. Since at the time of dissolution (pralaya) the jivas are destitute of senses, body and other means of enjoyment, no sorrow could be experienced by them; as a consequence, creation cannot be the result of the mercy evoked by the perception of persons afflicted by sorrow; hence, with the absence of the vapaka (the invariably concomitant), namely, persona! gain and mercy, there must be the absence of the vyapya (that which is inherent), namely, the activity of a sensible person. He who creates the universe out of mercy must have created it in such a fashion that pleasure alone is present in the universe. If it were suggested that he pays due regard to the past deeds of jivas, his independence would be lost. 

### The argument that the nimitta karana need not know the upadāna kerana and hence one who is not omniscient could be cause. 

Besides, there is no rule to the effect that agency belongs only to that person who directly perceives the material cause and the like; for 

[[P144]]

in respect of activitios, such as knowing, agency belongs to the soul even though the latter is ignorant of the auxiliary causes. 

### The Mimamsaka concludes his argument 

Hence, in as much as the hetu, namely, 'being an effect' is liab'e (for the considerations mentioned just now) to be charged with the defects of being unestablished (*asiddha*), adverse *(*viruddha and anekanta (straying), it is impossible that the universe should have for its cause a person like the one suggested by you. 

This may be expressed in syllogistic form thus:-(I) Phenomena. such as, the earth and the mountain, are not effects, for the reason that, like other, they are thoroughly unlike what are well-known to be effects. or for the reason that here, unlike the case of jars, the knowledge of material and auxiliary causes is impossible to secure. (2) The infinitesimal atoms are imperceptible; for, unlike jars and the like, they are exceedingly subtle substances. (3) The period under discussion ( .e.... *pralaya)* is not characterised by the absence of the world: for it is also a period like the present one. (4) The body. the world and the like do not have God for their agent; for. like the jar. they are effects (5) God is not an agent, because he has no purpose in creating the world. or because, like the released soul, he is not possessed of a body. 

### THE NAIYAYIKA REPLY TO THE MĪMĀMSAKA CONTENTION 

To these arguments of the Mimamsaka the Naiyay ka replies — The character of being an effect cannot be denied to earth ([[kṣ ✰|kṣiti]]) and other substances; because, like the jar etc., they are endowed with parts, or with activities while they are yet big in magnitude, or with forms while they are big in magnitude, or with wider and narrower generality (samanya-viseṣa) while they are open to external perception and because of other reasons like this. We know of no distinct feature associated exclusively with a particular configuration of parts, about which it could be said 'This mode of configuration alone is an effect, and none else is.' 

[[P145]]

### Meeting the charge that there is no vyāpti 

The contention that that alone can be said to be created which it is possible to produce and whose material and auxiliary causes can possibly be known may be true enough: but the capacity to do and the power to know can only be inferred from activity and knowledge. And since these have been shown to exist in respect of the earth *(kşiti*) and the like, on the strength of the reasons adduced already, it is clear that there is no special feature that could mark off the body, the world and the like from well-known effects, such as, the temple tower and the wall. No restriction to the effect "The scope of activity is only this much' is noticed to limit activity to certain objects alone: and if such a restriction exists, we may assert that this cosmos is impossible of production. If it is proved to be an effect, it necessarily follows that there is a person who is competent to perceive directly its material and other causes, and to control and direct the same. 

### The nature of [[adhiṭṣhāna|adhiṣṭhāna]] defined. 

As in the case of the control of his own body and (senses) by the jiva, here also (i.e., in regard to the cosmos) control *(adhiṣṭhāna*) consists merely in the proximity (to the cosmos) of a God possessed of a will conducive to its activity. With regard to substances (dravya) this proximity takes the form of conjunction (*samyoga*); and in regard to their qualities, it is inherence (samavāya) in that wherein there is con-' junction (*samyukta).* 

Coming to activity (*pravṛtti*), that of infinitesimal atoms is merely change of place (parispanda). With regard to merit (dharma) and demerit (adharma), their activity is simply their coming into associa- tion with appropriate place (*desa*) and times *(*kala) and other auxiliary causes helpful to the starting of the fruits of deeds, 

It is wrong to maintain that the fruits of activities result from merit and demerit themselves;[^145_*] for these and all other things not controlled 

[^145_*]: *In the printed books and manuscripts this sentence reads thus, without the negative particle, 'tabhyam dharmadbarmabhyam phalam.' But from the context it is clear that the text should be 'na ca tabhyam..." 

[[P146]]

by an intelligent entity cannot effect anything by themselves; since they are devoid of sentience. Though provided with auxiliary causes, such as place and time, the axe not controlled by a carpenter, an intelligent being, is indeed incapable of making objects like the sacrificial post (yupa). For the reason that instances such as seed-sprout are already included in the *paksa* (minor term), the suggestion that in view of the case of seed-sprout (where the non-sentient seed, not controlled by any intelligent agent, produces the sprout by its own effort) the foregoing argument commits the fallacy of *vyabhicara* is the outcome of the ignor- ance (of the methods of inference) found in persons who are merely versed in the vedas. On the same count, the attempt to level the charge of *vyabhicāra* by citing the instance of pleasure and the like stands con- demned.[^146_2] 

[^146_2]: 2. Since pleasure and other affective states, which are devoid of consciousness, produce, even in the absence of any control from an intelligent person, their appro- priate bodily responses, such as smiling, flow of tears and several organic and visceral changes, it may be urged that the argument is vitiated by vyabhicāra dosa. 

### The jiva cannot be nimitta kārana of the world 

It is not right to attribute control to finite souls themselves simply because they are accepted by both the rival disputants; for the jiva's incapacity to perceive what is subtle and what is screened from view is well-established (Rather than admitting a separate entity, God, would it not be better to attribute this capacity to perceive the subtle and the hidden to finite souls themselves? The answer is in the negative) for what is posited must everywhere be in conformity with, and not con- tradictory to, what is known. It is not well-established that the incapa- city to perceive the subtle and the veiled belongs to God, as it belongs to the jivas; because by means of other pramaņas the capacity to per- ceive them is proved to belong to him. The person whose existence is proved on the strength of the argument already advanced is surely as- certained to possess in his essential nature the capacity to perceive all things and to direct them; for 'being an effect' is invariably concomitant wtih 'dependence upon a competent agent.'  

[[P147]]

### The [[untenabiitly|untenability]] of the contention that the argument only estabishes attributes opposed to omniscience etc. 

The objection raised already (vide p. 142), namely that, as the *hetu* points only to limited capacity and fragmentary knowledge and to the absence of lordship, it establishes only the reverse of the qualities intended to be proved, is highly superficial: for. clearly, the *hetu* in question does not lead to the inferring of limited powers and the like.[^147_3] In fact, for its own production any object that is being produced does not require on the part of its agent either the incapacity to effect other things or ignorance concerning them: for, in as much as it would only lead to the inference that there is a person competent to make it, the absence of the capacity to produce other things does not follow there- from.[^147_4] When the production of an effect may well take place solely with the aid of knowledge and power concerning the same, it is quite unnecessary to consider what is wholly unrelated to it and what has nothing to do with it, namely the absence (of knowledge and power) concerning other effects, as being responsible for its production. 

[^147_3]: 3. The reading found in all books is ... asamarthyam jñānam... but it ought to be ...asamarthyamajñānam...' 
[^147_4]: 4. All books examined read kevelavyatirekäsiddheḥ.' Perhaps a better. reading would be 'kevalam vyatirekāsiddheḥ.' 

Further, it has to be carefully ascertained whether what is said to be invariably concomitant (*vyāpaka*), namely, 'ignorance of other things and incapacity to effect them,' concerns all things other than the effect in question or certain things only. It cannot be ignorance pertain- ing to all things; for we know of no such ignorance. Indeed, the potter' is not ignorant of everything excepting the pot. If it be urged that the ignorance pertains to certain things only, even this suggestion fares no better; for, so long as the object of ignorance is left unspecified, the argument is liable to be charged with *vyabhicara doșa* in view of the fact that even in the absence of ignorance concerning any given object, agency is still possible. No one object has been specified in order to be able to assert "Only that person who is ignorant of such and such an object is fit to become an agent." 

[[P148]]

There is no need to contend that the agent should only be a person endowed with a body; for this contention is liable to be charged with *anekānta dosa* in view of the very fact of the activity of assuming a body. Indeed, the soul does not take up a body while being already associated with a body; for. then it would be impossible for the yogin to take up several bodies simultaneously. When discussing the nature of the soul it has been shown that it is only after relinquishing the former body the soul enters upon another solely with the assistance of vital breath (prāṇ) which is induced to activity by past deeds which procure a fresh body. 

### What is needed for creation is controlling activity and not the body. 

Moreover. the body which is the object of the controlling activity on the part of the self, the controller of the body, cannot intelligibly be included in the very body of the definition of the controller; for one and the same thing being at once the agent and the object in the self- same activity involves a contradiction. If it be maintained that control, which is simply the possession of an effort conducive to the activity of the body, is known to belong only to him who is in conjunction with the body which is sought to be controlled, it has to be replied: 'let it be admitted that the controller should be related to the object controlled, since the control of a given object is impossible to him who is unrelated to it.' (It may be asked) How is it determined that this relation need not be the bodily relation? (The reply is) "It is for this reason, namely, that other objects also, such as the measuring rod, are controlled by one who is merely related to them.. Therefore, apart from what is required for the controlling activity. namely, mere relation to the object controlled, no other relation like the relation to the body, need be countenanced. And it has already been pointed out that relationship to material and auxiliary causes of the cosmos exists in God. 

### Activity can be initiated without the instrumentality of the body i. e. mere samkalpa suffices 

It may be objected that the causing of any particular form of activity in things other than the body is done only with the aid of the body; for 

[[P149]]

it is found that the power in the staff, wheel and the like belongs to the potter and other agents only in virtue of factors, such as contact with the hand. This objection too is untenable; for the extraction and the scattering of the poison that has entered one's body is observed to be effected by another person by the mere exercise of his will.  ́ 

When the body is absent how, it may be asked, could the will to cause movements in other things arise? (The reply is) Then is it con- tended that it is the body that wills? If that is so, in its absence there will be no will. Should it be urged that the body (does not itself will, but) is the instrument (*karaṇa*) in the act of willing, it may be replied "not so"; for the mind *(*manas) is the instrument of willing. 

Has God, then, a manas? (The answer is) "Quite so". If it be said that in that event, certain common features. such as the possession of a body, merit and demerit and the absence of sovereignty, would have to be attributed to God, the reply is "not so." For this objection is set aside on the very strength of the fact of the world having a competent agent, a fact inferred with the aid of the *hetu* that it is an effect. Morcover, since even when the body perishes contact with manas has been admitted, in as much as it is an eternal organ of sense, the argument is vitiated by anekanta *doṣa*. In fact, only that much which is relevant to the inductive relation and which is in conformity with what is perceived is admitted Since a person whose body occupies a limited area, whose knowledge is limited and whose action is subject to merit and demerit, is incapable of creation the world composed of the primal elements and what is constituted of these, and possessed of a structure inconceivable even by our minds and an extent which is boundless, it has to be concluded that there is an agent who is endowed with illimita- ble knowledge, sovereignty, and power and who, without requiring the body, is capable of creating all the worlds with the sole aid of his will. 

### No need to entertain any doubt on the ground that in the case in point many of the characteristics differ from those found in the illustrative example. 

If it be said that in instances such as the jar no invariable relation between the character of being an effect and an agent of this descrip- 

[[P150]]

tion is observed. (we ask in reply) is the relation of smoke with fire of a description which exists on the dense hill side, which is never experien- ced before, which is huge in volume and fed by an enormous quantity of fuel, ever noticed in the kitchen? If it were so, on the perception of a particular kind of smoke it could be inferred that on the hill-top there is fire of that description. If it be said that when a certain kind of smoke is found in a given place (to be concomitant with a particular kind of fire) that kind of smoke will be capable of leading to inference of that kind of fire in that locality alone, and that a fire of a diffe- rent description, even when it is not noticed in the illustrative example could still be inferred with the aid of the inductive relation of smoke in general with fire in general, in consideration of the inductive relation of the paksa wherein it resides (in this argument it is the hill), (we ask) how is it that when we maintain the same position it fails to appeal to your mind? Here also the character of being an effect, which is known in examples, such as the pot, to have an invariable concomitance with dependence upon a competent agent, when noticed in the case of earth and the like, points to an intelligent agent, who is capable of producing them and is hitherto unknown. Just as by ignoring the place where fire is found, the time of its existence, the fuel by which it is fed, the size, and other characteristics of fire, the invariable concomitance of smoke with fire alone which is responsible for its very existence is established; even so by eliminating the special characteristics of the agent, such as the absence of lordship (anisvaratva), the possession of fragmentary knowledge, the characteristics of fire, the invariable concomitance of smoke with fire alone which is responsible for its very existence is established; even so by eliminating the special characteristics of the agent, such as, the absence of lordship (*anisvaralva*). the possession of fragmentary knowledge. the character of owning a body, of being subject to merit and demerit, and of being human, universal concomi- tance of an effect with an intelligent agent merely, who is competent to make it, is ascertained. Hence. there is no special feature marking o off these two cases. 

[[P151]]

### Adducing special illustrations to strengthen the conclusion that the divine creator is vastly different from the human agent. 

(Difficulties arise when it is insisted that all the special features found in the illustrative example should be found in all the cases coming under that vyapti. For example) ;-When an object, which is in conjunction with an all-pervasive substance and which possesses move- ment, is known without exception to be everywhere associated with the possession of touch, how can the minds whose eonjunction with the soul is inferred from consciousness, pleasure and other special qualities of an eternal substance, be devoid of touch (sparsa)? When what is com- posed of wind and what possesses visible magnitude is found to be invariably concomitant with the character of being the object of the sensation of touch and is also found to have a particular abode, how can the opposite character be met with in the sense of touch?[^151_5][^151_6] 

[^151_5]: 5. The Naiyayika raises this objection against the Prabhakara school, and not against the Bhatta school, of Mîmāmsā; for the former believes that manas is atomic, while the latter maintains that manas, like the atman, is all-pervasive *(vibhu*). And on the Naiyayika view that there cannot be any samyoga between two vibhudravyas, manas cannot be in conjunction with the soul. 
[^151_6]: 6. Some entities constituted of vayu, such as prana, viyāna, udana and samana, dwell only in particular regions of the body. For example, prana is said to dwell in the heart *(hṛdi*); and samana, in the navel (mābhi). And the air outside is cognisable by the sense of touch. The sense organ for touch, however, has the entire body for its adhiṣṭhāna and not merely a particular region thereof. Nor is it the object of the sense of touch. 

When either the colour (rupa) or the contact (*sparsa*) of fiery objects must invariably be explicit, how could it be admitted that these two are never explicit in the eye, which is inferred to be fiery, for the reason that it is the instrument for cognising colour? 
If it be said that it is so admitted (i. e, that the eye is devoid of explicit *rūpa* or *sparsa*) for the reason that the belief in the special' qualities (i.e., explicit rūpa or *sparsa*) appropriate to the respective 

[[P152]]

cases is contradicted by effectual non-apprehension (*yogyānupalabdhi*). even though the character of being fiery is attributed to these (i.e., the oye and so forth) whose existence is inferred from a knowledge of their activity, and for the reason that on this admission (namely, that the special features found in the illustrative examples should be inferred to exist in other cases as well), there would be an end to all inference; (it may be replied) well, if that be so even in the case under discussion it may be admitted that these qualities do not belong to the creator of the world, because the special qualities of the potter, which in your opinion would have to be attributed to the creator of the earth and the like, are likewise contradicted by non-apprehension and because snch an admis- sion would mean an end to all inductive generalisation. Thus, the two cases are in every respect similar, except your prejudice. 

### Other arguments to establish the existence of Isvara 

In fact the following arguments are met with (1) The infinitesimal atoms and so forth, the precise manner of whose activity is under dis- pure, act under the direction of an intelligent person; for they are non- sentient and whatever is a non-sentient object, acts in this way: for example, the ball and other non-sentient objects, (2) All activities, internal and external, concerning which there is difference of opinion, presuppose the perception of their material and auxiliary causes; be- cause, like the activities of the examples cited in the previous argument they are effects. (8) The infinitesimal atom is perceptible;[^152_7] because, like the jar, it is an object of knowledge and is an entity. (4) The world is dependent upon the will of a person; for, like our own body, it is devoid of consciousness. (5) All intelligent persons act only under the control of a single intelligent entity (i. e., God): for by standing in need of contact with their bodies they enter upon their activities, liko 

[^152_7]: 7 In the Chaukamba and Telugu editions the following variant reading for the text commencing after the word योग्यानुपलन्धिमा वितत्वात् and ending with तद्वदेव is suggested:- 

[[P153]]

the sense of touch and so forth. (6) The world, which is the object of all this dispute, points to a single Supreme Person; because, like a country ruled over by a supreme monarch, the world consists of sentient and nonsentient entities. 

The text of Isvara-Siddhi available is only this much. 

तदस्युपगमेऽनेकनियम दर्शनविघातप्रसङ्गाच्च
पक्षधर्मताबललभ्यार्थविशेषाव वोधकानेव श्रुत्यादिमानवाच प्रसङ्गाच्च समर्थकर्तृपूर्वत्वेन घटादिषु विदितसम्बन्धनियवं कार्यत्वं क्षित्यादिषु दृश्यमानं स्वोत्पाकुमदृष्टपूर्वमेव बुद्धि मत्कर्तारमद्वितीयं पुरुषधौरेयं साधयतीत्यभ्युपगन्तव्यम् । तरतमभावापन्नवैचित्र्यवत्तत्तत्कार्येषु कार्यस्वमेव तदनु गुणं कर्तारमनुमाषयति चेत्, महीमहींधरादिरूपजगद्यतकार्यत्वमपि तदनुगुणं कर्तारमनुमापयतीति कैमुत्यसिद्धेऽर्थे व्यर्थोऽयं निरीश्वरमीमांसकस्यास दुरभिनिवेशः । दृश्यन्ते ह्यस्मिन्नर्थे अन्ये च हेतत: ( 1 ) त्रैकालिकं कुत्स्नं जगत् तदनुगुणशक्तथादिगुणगणवदायत स्थितिलयकं, अचिन्त्यविविधविचित्ररचनत्वात्, अतिकुशलै कायत्तस्थित्यादिकतया प्रमित चित्रप्रतिमादवत् । (2) विभूतिपदाभिधेयं कृत्स्नं एकाधेयविधेयशेषभावं तच्छरीरत्वात्, मच्छरीरवत् । Except for the two new arguments which this passage sets forth at its end, it contains no substantial change. These arguments are:- 

(1) The world existing at all times, the past, the present and the future possesses a continuance and a destruction which are subject to a person endowed with a group of qualities, such as power appropriate thereto; because it has mani- . fold wonderful shapes inconceivable even by the mind; for example, pictures and dolls which are well-known to have their continuance and so forth subject to a very competent person. (2) All things denoted by the expression vibhúti possess the characters of being supported by (*ādheyatva*), being controlled by (*vidheyatva*), and existing for the sake of (*seṣātva*) a person; for, in the manner of one's own body, they constitute his body.