+++
title = "०२ Bhattar (ParASara Bhattar)"

+++

KoorattAzhvAn was the pradhAna Sishya of EmperumAnAr. AzhvAn mastered all the SAstrAs. He had deep devotion to EmperumAnAr. He had all the attributes (guNams) that are expected of a disciple. People used to say that there was no one like AzhvAn. He will not do any harm to anyone. He cannot bear the sufferings of others. He would not even walk over the grass for the fear of stamping on the grass and disfiguring it. He is very compassionate and mild mannered person who shuns cruelty in any form (AnruSamsaya pradhAnar). AzhvAn used to take uncavrtti (bhikshA) from the households of Brahmins. He used to cook food with the grains received as bhikshA, offered the same as nivedanam to the Lord and used to take the same as prasAdam.

One day during upAdAna time, (time during which materials etc., to be acquired for ArAdhanam), there was incessant rain. AzhvAn could not go out of the house for uncavrtti. Hence, cooking could not be done as there were no grains (rice). AzhvAn offered fruit as nivedanam to the Lord, completed ArAdhanam and was reading the granthams. In the evening he did sandhyAvandanam and bhagavadArAdhanam. He then retired to bed without food. His wife, Andal could not sleep. She was worried and sorrowful as AzhvAn was starving. She heard the sound of the final ringing bell from the temple indicating that after the tiruvArAdhanam, taligai (food) is being offered to the Lord as nivedanam. She prayed "Hey Prabho! Ranganatha! Your devotee is starving whereas the tiruvArAdhanam for you is being conducted without any disruption and taligai is being offered to you as nivedanam. Can't you bless your devotee?" Thus, praying she wept.

SrI RanganAthan worrying about this, appeared in the dream of Uttamanambi and directed him, telling "You take the prasAdams offered now as nivedanam to us (the Lord) with chatra, cAmara and other temple honours to the house of KoorattAzhvAn and inform him that we (the Lord) have sent these". AzhvAn got up on hearing the sound of musical instruments. He received Uttamanambi and asked him, "What are all these?” Uttamanambi said, "On the divine order of Periya Perumal, aDiyEn brought the prasAdams. Devareer may eat them". Thus saying Nambi went away.

AzhvAn took the prasAdam inside the house and asked Andal, "What could be the reason for the divine grace of the Lord today? Did you [[143]] think of anything?" Andal replied that she appealed to the Lord thus, "When Your devotee is starving without any prasAdam, how can You have tiruvArAdhanam and enjoy the nice bhogam?" AzhvAn was upset on hearing about this. Since it was the divine command of the Lord, he partook one third of the portion of the prasAdam and gave over the rest to his wife, Andal.

Because of the glory of the bhagavat prasAdam of the Lord, Andal conceived. After ten months, in the month of VaikASi when Anusha nakshatram was in ascendance, she gave birth to two boy babies. AzhvAn performed the jAtakarmam (birth ceremony) and puNyahavacanam (purification) rituals. AzhvAn said that EmperumAnAr himself will name these infants. Saying thus, he did not perform the nAmakaraNam (naming ceremony). Udaiyavar came to know of this and visited the home of KoorattAzhvAn along with EmpAr. He asked EmpAr to bring the infants to him.

EmpAr went inside, took the infants from Andal and reciting dvaya mantram, he brought them to EmperumAnAr. On seeing this, Udaiyavar exclaimed, "The beautiful fragrance of dvayam is coming out of these two babies!" EmpAr said, "I was wonder struck by the beauty of the two babies. With the intention of warding off any dosham (ill omen) that may be caused to the babies, I chanted dvaya mahA mantram while bringing the infants here". EmperumAnAr was moved by this and said, "The same manner in which you care for their physical well being, you may nurture their intellect, shape up their spiritual upliftment too by being their AcArya". Then he named the first born child as ParASara Bhattar as a krutaj~natA (gratitude) to SrIparASara BhagavAn and the second child as VedavyAsa Bhattar (other name is SrIrAma Bhattar), blessed them and left for his maTham.

Namperumal adopted ParASara Bhattar as his son. A cradle was set up for the infant near His sannidhi (garbha gruham) between the tirumaNa Pillars. Ranganayaki tAyAr reared him with Her love and affection and by bathing and feeding him milk. When Bhattar began to crawl, he used to take the prasAdams kept for Namperumal with his hands and eat them. On seeing this, the Lord felt very happy.

Bhattar's question

Bhattar reached the age of five. KoorattAzhvAn was reciting TiruvAimozhi pAsurams. When he was reciting NammAzhvAr's TiruvAimozhi pAsuram of "நெடுமாற்கடிமை neDumARkaDimai", he [[144]] recited the pAsura vAkyam as "சிறுமா மனிசர் ciRumA manicar". At this point, the young Bhattar asked, "Oh Father! AzhvAr said 'cirRumA manicar' in this pAsuram. How can this be appropriate? 'சிறு ciRu' meaning small (ciRumai) and 'மா mA' meaning glorious (perumai). They have opposite meaning and contradicting each other. How can one use such a single word to describe the same person?" On hearing this, AzhvAn with tears of joy, was wonderstruck at the clever question of his son. AzhvAn responded saying, "Oh child! Your observation is correct. Since you have not undergone the sacred thread ceremony, it is not permitted to teach you TiruvAimozhi and other SAstrAs. However, I will clear your doubt though an example of things that you could visualise. Are not ciRiyAccAn and AruLALaperumal EmperumAnAr short (ciRiya/kuLLam) in stature? Are we not paying our obeisance to them as elders? Why? Even though they are physically short in stature but by the knowledge and intellect (accrued through much learning) they are considered superior (periya). Therefore, we see the same two qualities, small and glorious (ciRumai, perumai) in the same person. Is it not? In the same manner, AzhvAr said, "சிறுமாமனிசர் ciRumAnicar".

Fist full of sand

On another day, ParASara Bhattar was playing in the street meddling with sand with his hands. At that time one by name, Sarvaj~na Bhattar was being carried in a palanquin and going in a procession with all paraphernalia, hailing his many titles by his followers. Bhattar saw this and asked, "Who is this? This is the place where great AcAryAs like EmperumAnAr, AzhvAn, ANDAN, AruLALaperumAl EmperumAnAr, EmpAr and other scholars are here. Who is this person who dares to come here in a palanquin to the accompaniment of hailing his titles (birudu)? I shall test his competency myself". Saying thus, Bhattar took a fistful of sand and went close to the palanquin and asked him, "If you claim that you are Sarvaj~nar, you tell me how much sand is there inside my fist. You can then continue your procession with the hailing of your many titles". Sarvaj~na Bhattar was happy to hear the prattling of a child. But he could not answer the question and he kept quiet. ParASara Bhattar repeatedly asked the question a few times and then said, "You could not even answer this as a fistful of sand. Why then this title of Sarvaj~na Bhattar? You can not go in this street with hailing your titles". Sarvaj~na Bhattar was thrilled and happy to hear the words of a child and wanted to know as to whose child is this. The people near by said that the child is the son of AzhvAn. [[145]] "The offspring of a bird will never be crawling on the ground, is it not? Being the son of AzhvAn, he is highly intelligent", saying thus he took the child and seated him right next to him in the palanquin and went around the place. When they reached the house of AzhvAn, he disembarked the child.

On hearing about this incident, the people nearby were very happy. To ward of any ill omen that might fall on the child, they did the preventive process (drushTi dosham). The people had mixed emotions of happiness and concern and talked amongst themselves as what kind of penance his mother would have done to give birth to him. They were wondering with happiness and fear as to weather this child being a child prodigy will live a long life in this world? At the age of eight, upanayanam was performed to Bhattar. After the upanayanam, Bhattar started learning Vedas. Fearing that some ill omen may fall on him, AzhvAn and Andal discontinued Bhattar's further learning. After a few days, Yatirajar came to know of this and directed AzhvAn and EmpAr themselves to teach him all aspects of Vedas. Accordingly they both taught Bhattar everything.

Divine command of Periya Perumal

On one occasion, Bhattar entered the sannidhi of Periya Perumal. The sannidhi's curtain was closed. Suddenly there was a voice saying, "Who is that? Get out of here". Bhattar came out of the sannidhi. Again the same voice was saying, "Who is that? Is it Bhattar? Come inside. Thought it was somebody else and so asked you to go out. You may come in!" Bhattar offered MangaLASAsanam to Periya Perumal. At that instance, Perumal asked Bhattar, "When you were told to get out of the sannidhi, what did you think?" Bhattar said, "Thought today Perumal and PirATTi are in ekAntam (privacy)". Perumal asked again, "Before that what were your thoughts?" Bhattar said, "Earlier thought You and PirATTi as AzhvAn and Andal." Periya Perumal was overjoyed by this answer and said, "Oh Bhattar! This is my command. Keep your thoughts as before".

Marriage of Bhattar

AzhvAn wanted to get his two sons married when they reached marriageable age. As directed by EmperumAnAr, he approached one of the relatives of Periya Nambigal and solicited his daughter in marriage to ParASara Bhattar. He also agreed to this. However after some time the parents, "This proposal for the alliance is coming from a new and unknown source. Hence we are not in favour of this proposal". After [[146]] some time Andal asked AzhvAn, "Even after our sons have attained marriageable age, should we remain without seeking suitable brides?"

AzhvAn laughed at this and said, that we should not worry by taking this matter ourselves, since it is concerned with ISvara kuTumbam (family of the Lord). When he went to the temple and offered his MangaLASAsanam, he appealed to the Lord about the worry of Andal and asked the Lord, "How does aDiyEn know as what is Your intention". Namperumal answered that soon He (Perumal) will get a proper alliance". That very night the Lord appeared in the dream of the person whose daughter was solicited as a suitable alliance by AzhvAn and commanded him to get married both his daughters to ParASara Bhattar at the earliest. Next morning he went to the home of AzhvAn and agreed to get married his two daughters to ParASara Bhattar. AzhvAn asked him, "Earlier you were not prepared to give one of your daughters in marriage to ParASara Bhattar whereas now you are willing to give both daughters in marriage to Bhattar. This is surprising! What is the reason?"

The father of the brides said that Periya Perumal appeared in his dream and ordered him to give both his daughters in marriage to Bhattar and to get the marriage performed at the earliest. He further asked the Lord, "When they approached, I declined saying that the proposal is coming from an unknown source. Will they agree now for this proposal and what is the reason to give both the daughters to one person?" Periya Perumal told me, "AzhvAn was seeking one bride for My svIkAra Putran (adopted son) which is not acceptable to Me (Lord) and My tradition. Therefore, We (Periya Perumal) changed your mind. Now you arrange the marriage of your two daughters with Bhattar and make Me happy". The father of the brides told AzhvAn, "This was the divine order. Hence I am appealing to you. I asked Perumal further, as to why You are proclaiming Bhattar as Your son? For this question, SrI Ranganathan said, SrI Alavandar performed prapatti to Me and prayed that a righteous son (sat putran) should be born and to give him the name of SrI ParASarar. We (the Lord) were awaiting the appropriate time to fulfil this prayer of Alavandar and make him happy. On that day when AzhvAn was starving, We (Perumal) sent the PrasAdams to him. When AndAl partook that prasAdam, she conceived and gave birth to two sons due to Our (Lord) own sankalapam. We took the elder one as Our svIkAra putran and made the younger one as their own. Do not think of him as ordinary folks". The father of the daughters told AzhvAn that it is the direction of BhagavAn.

[[147]] These incidents were conveyed to Udaiyavar. He was very happy. The marriage was performed on an auspicious day.

After the period of EmpAr, Bhattar was performing discourses and propagating the Ramanuja siddhAnta granthams. During that time, a SrI VaishNavar on a pilgrimage of divya deSams came to Srirangam. He took his bath in the River Cauvery and worshipped Perumal and tAyAr at the temple. He then went to the home of Bhattar to offer his obeisance to him. Bhattar extended due courtesies and enquired about the well being of the Sri VaishNavar. He introduced himself saying he belongs to MelnADu (Karnataka) and coming from Tirunarayanapuram for divya deSa yAtrA and came to Srirangam. Bhattar asked him as to whether any special happenings in MelnADu. The SrI VaishaNava replied, "In that deSam, there is a scholar well versed in all SAstrAs and is known as VedAnti. He is teaching several of his disciples with advaita philosophy. Devareer (Bhattar) also is a scholar and having disciples like that of the advaita VedAnti". Bhattar asked him, "Oh! Is there a person like me in MelnADu?" The VaishNava replied, "Yes". He then returned back to his place at MelnADu.

When he reached Tirunarayanapuram, he met the vedAnti and told him, "There is a great scholar named Bhattar in Srirangam like you. Hundreds of SishyAs are undergoing kAlakshepams on ViSishTAdvaita vedAntas under him". The VedAnti asked him, "Oh SrI VaishNava! Is there someone equal to me?" The SrI VaishNavar replied saying, "He is more scholarly than you". The VedAnti asked him, "What are the SAstrAs that he (Bhattar) has learnt? Is he well versed in tarkam, VyAkaraNam, mImAmsa SAstrAs etc.?"

The same SrI VaishNava came back to Srirangam again. He offered his obeisance to Bhattar and narrated the conversation he had with the VedAnti at Tirunarayanapuram. Bhattar asked him, "What did you tell the VedAnti about the SAstrAs that I am conversant with?" The SrI VaishaNava said. "I told him that you are very well versed in Sabda, tarka, pUrva and uttara mImAsa SAstrAs".

Bhattar told the SrI VaishNavar, "SvAmi! Did you tell the vedAnti only about Sabda, tarka SAstrAs which are known to me, but did not tell him about what other SAstras I am very conversant with?"

The SrI VaishNavar said, "SvAmin! What I have told him is that you have mastered world renowned aspects of SAstras". Bhattar went on to tell the Sri VaishNavar, “Oh SrI VaishNava! Next time when you meet the VedAnti, tell him that I am well versed in [[148]] 'TiruneDuntANDakam'. The SrI VaishNavar when he happened to meet the VedAnti again told him, "Bhattar is well versed and knowledgeable in TiruneDuntANDakam better than you”. The VedAnti was astonished and said, "Never aware of one such SAstra. This seems to be something very new to me".

On another occasion, the SrI VaishNavar from MelnAdu, (Tirunarayanapuram) came to Srirangam. He met Bhattar and said, "I told the VedAnti that you are well versed in TiruneDuntANDakam. He was astonished". Bhattar decided to make the VedAnti to reform him and to embrace the SrI VaishNava siddhAntam. He took leave of Periya Perumal and left for MelnAdu (Tirunarayanapuram) to enter into a debate with the VedAnti and to win over him and make him embrace SrI VaishNava ideology. Bhattar reached a village called Siruputtur on the banks of River Cauvery. AnantAzhvAn on leaning about Bhattar's visit, rushed to that village to receive Bhattar. He asked Bhattar, "Devareer being very delicate and tender, is it proper to come here, walking through forest, and rough terrains?"

Bhattar replied to him, "I have come here on the direction of Namperumal and EmperumAnAr to reform the VedAnti and to make him to embrace our siddhAntam”. Bhattar reached Tirunarayanapuram, took a bath in the Kalyani PushkaraNi, completed his daily rituals and offered MangaLASAsanam to Tirunarayanan, Yadugiri Nacchiyar, EmperumAnAr and Azhagiyasingar (Narasimhar, who killed the asura, Hiranyan), in his sannidhi on the hill. He took their blessings and proceeded to the place where the VedAnti is living.

When Bhattar neared the town of Gangodri where the VedAnti is living, he adorned himself with the jewellery of Aranaganagarappan and other ornaments. Bhattar seated in a palanquin, going in a procession was followed by hundreds of his SishyAs. The SishyAs were hailing the various birudus (titles) of Bhattar like "aNiyarangar kumArar Rangaraja Bhattar came here, AzhvAn's son ParASara Bhattar came here, VedantacArya Bhattar is here, Vediyarkal tanittalaivar Bhattar came here, ParavAdi matahasti pancAnanar is here et al". The procession was accompanied with vAdya gosham, blowing the tiruccinnam (a special musical instrument played during the procession of Lord, tAyAr), paraphernalia like umbrellas, fans (chatra cAmara) etc.

At that time, two SrI VaishNavas came across the procession. They did their obeisance to Bhattar and asked him, "From which divya deSam Devareer coming? Where are you heading? What is the reason for the [[149]] visit with so much excitement and grandeur?" Bhattar replied to them, "aDiyEn is Rangaraja Bhattar and heading to meet the VedAnti for a debate with him". The SrI VaishNavAs told Bhattar, "Devareer cannot meet the VedAnti, if you approach him with this excitement and grandeur. VedAnti's SishyAs and their SishyAs outside the house will be debating with the visiting scholars for four to six months and send them back without meeting him". Bhattar asked the VaishNavAs, "If so, then how to see the VedAnti". If you know some other way of meeting him, please tell". The VaishNavAs said that the VedAnti is very proficient in all the six SAstrAs and is very wealthy. Every day several poor Brahmins are offered food in his presence. If you enter the house in the form of a poor Brahmin along with others, you will be able to meet the VedAnti". Accordingly, Bhattar stopped all the paraphernalia there itself. He removed his expensive clothes and ornaments and proceeded to the house of VedAnti as a poor Brahmin with a cup made out of dried leaf (donnai). On entering the house, he saw the VedAnti sitting atop six seats in a prestigious manner. Bhattar stopped there itself while the others went in to the dining area.

VedAnti looked at Bhattar and asked, "Oh son (piLLAy)! Why are you standing here?" Bhattar replied, "I am waiting for bikshA". VedAnti told him. "If so, you have to go to the dining area where all others are going". Bhattar retorted saying, "I have not come for the bikshA for food". This made the VedAnti to think that even though this person has come for food, he appears to be a scholar. He asked Bhattar "kA bikshA (what bikshA)". Bhattar responded saying, "tarka bikshA (bikshA for debate)". VedAnti was taken aback by this response. He realised that this person must be Bhattar, mentioned by the SrI VaishNava who returned from pilgrimage. He said to himself, "No one in this earth is capable standing in front of me and seeking tarka bikshA". He came to the conclusion that this must be Bhattar only even though he is appearing to be a poor Brahmin. He asked Bhattar, "Are you the Devareer, Bhattar who is seeking tarka bikshA from me”. Bhattar saying, "Yes", threw away the dried leaf cup and started upadeSam on ViSishTAdvaita siddhAntam.

Even though the VedAnti has heard about the reputation of Bhattar, he has not personally experienced his scholarly proficiency. As such he wanted to debate with Bhattar. Bhattar told the VedAnti, "Till there is a result of the debate as to who won, who lost, you order your security persons to allow me to come and go and freely". VedAnti agreed to do so. The debate started and it went on for nine days with no sign of anyone of them winning. On the ninth day, Bhattar returned to his quarters, performed tiruvArAdhanam to the Perumal and offered [[150]] prasAdams to Perumal. With out eating, he was meditating on the holy feet of Namperumal and Udaiyavar. Then he retired to bed in a worried state.

That night, Periya Perumal appeared in the dream of Bhattar and said "Oh Bhattar! We waited till now for VedAnti to realize about your knowledge. Keeping in mind with the finer points of TiruneDuntANDagam of AzhvAr, SrI sUktis of Alavandar, you will emerge victorious in the debate". Next day morning, Bhattar completed his daily rituals and proceeded to the house of VedAnti to reach the hall where the debate was being conducted. On seeing the pleasant demeanour, the enthusiasm and the confidence in the gait of Bhattar, the VedAnti was awestruck and prostrated at the feet of Bhattar and conceded defeat. Bhattar told him that it is not correct and the debate has to be continued. They continued the debate and finally Bhattar won the debate. The VedAnti stood up and said, "Devareer! You are the incarnation of Namperumal only. There is no difference between you and Him. He is sleeping Perumal whereas you are walking Perumal". Saying thus reverentially, he appealed to Bhattar to accept him as his disciple. Bhattar performed panca samskArams to the VedAnti and inducted him as a SrI VaishaNavar. Bhattar advised him, "Oh VedAnti! You are highly intelligent and well aware of all the SAstrAs. We (Bhattar) need not explain everything in detail. You give up your faith on advaita philosophy and follow the ViSishTAdvaita siddhAntam with single minded devotion. Meditate Sriyahpati SrIman Narayanan, and propagate the siddhAntam of EmperumAnAr. Learn and recite the verses of the AzhvArs". Then he started from there saying, "Now we (Bhattar) will return to Periya Koyil (Srirangam) to worship Namperumal".

The palanquin, chatra cAmarams, vAdyams and other things which were all left behind were brought to the place of Bhattar. Bhattar wore the dress and other ornaments as before and got into the palanquin. The holy tiruccinnam sounded and all the musical instruments were played. VedAnti, who was nearby seeing this, admired and was happy about the glory and greatness of Bhattar. "This SrImAn (Bhattar) crossing over forest, hills came here to bless and reform me, just a lowly ordinary one", saying thus the VedAnti prostrated at the feet of Bhattar. He told Bhattar, "My soul has been wandering here and there and you reformed me and showed me the enlightened path by taking the form of a poor Brahmin and came to me along with others. I feel embarrassed that you disguised as a poor Brahmin, just to reform me who was beyond salvation". Thus saying he was in tearful state. Bhattar consoled him and lifted him up and blessed the VedAnti, "You [[151]] may continue with your tadhIyarAdhanams and live happily". Bhattar started for Srirangam. On the way, he offered MangaLASAsanam at Tirunarayanapuram and proceeded to Srirangam. The SrI VaishNavAs of Srirangam accorded a grand reception to Bhattar and took him to the sannidhi of Aranganagarappan. Bhattar offered MangaLASAsanam of Arangan. He was accorded the honours such as garland, tiruparivaTTam et al. He was escorted to his tirumAligai (home). Bhattar prostrated at the feet of Andal, his mother and took her blessings. From then on he continued his discourses to his SishyAs on darSana granthams and stayed at Srirangam.

Meanwhile at Gangodri, VedAnti was offering his courtesies to the SrI VaishNavAs who are the servants of SrIman Narayanan and conducting tadhIyArAdhanams. Once, two Sri VaishNavAs who were very hungry came to the house of VedAnti and requested for food. The two wives of VedAnti told them. "There is no food available here. Your VedAnti has gone out to the river for taking bath. You may go there". Thus saying they sent away the SrI VaishNAvAs. They both went to VedAnti and told him that they are hungry and the people in his household have ignored them. VedAnti came back home and reprimanded his wives. He thought that it is not correct to remain in the place where people are disrespecting SrI VaishNavAs and started for Srirangam. The people around him said, "It is not proper to go like that". They tried to dissuade him. VedAnti said that he is blessed with abundant wealth and he will divide the wealth in to three parts and give away two parts to his two wives and take the remaining one part for him to offer it to his AcAryA, Bhattar. Thus, he divided the wealth accordingly. He took his portion of Gold and precious gems and started his journey to Srirangam. He denounced the married life and took to ascetic order. On the way to Srirangam, he reached the village, Siruputtur on the banks of River Cauvery. There, AnantAzhvAn welcomed him and out of great concern and affection for the VedAnti told him, "SvAmin! You are such a delicate and kind person. When you are feeling hot and humid you take bath and when you feeling hungry, you take your food and keep chanting "Bhattar tiruvaDigalE SaraNam (the holy feet of Bhattar is my shelter)" Such an act would have ascertained paramapadam. Then who can push you down from there? Why did you take this step of embracing ascetic order?" Thus AnantAzhvAn extended his courtesies to VedAnti and bid him farewell from Siruputtur to Srirangam. In due course of time VedAnti reached Srirangam. He went to the holy abode of Bhattar. He prostrated at the feet of Bhattar and offered all the precious wealth that he brought with him. He appealed to Bhattar to accept the same and distribute it as per his wish. Bhattar asked [[152]] VedAnti, "What is this?" VedAnti replied, "My wives ignored and sent back two SrI VaishNavAs who were hungry by declining them food. If one could not respect and offer courtesies and food to guests what is the point in being a married person? Therefore, I divided the wealth in to three parts, gave away two parts to both wives. I left them and took to sanyAsam. I brought my portion loaded on to a camel to offer at your holy feet. SvAmi may utilise this as per your wish". After hearing this, Bhattar said, "If that is so, you may dump it on the banks of river Cauvery”. Accordingly, the VedAnti carried out the order of Bhattar. The heap of wealth was lying on the banks of Cauvery and no one touched it. One day, Bhattar came to Cauvery for taking bath and on seeing the heap of the gems, he asked VedAnti. "What is this heap of wealth?" VedAnti replied, "Devareer! This is the accumulated wealth for distribution by you as you may wish". Bhattar asked him, "What was your intention to do with this wealth?”. VedAnti replied, "I wanted to create a flower garden and offer the flowers from that garden to the Lord". Bhattar told VedAnti, "You can do accordingly”. Even after creating the flower garden, considerable amount of money remained. VedAnti asked Bhattar, "What can I do now with this surplus of money?" To this, Bhattar answered, "Conduct tadhiyArAdhanam for the BhAgavatAs". VedAnti accordingly carried out the order of his AcAryA by organising tadhIyArAdhanam to BhAgavatAs. Moved by the AcArya bhakti of the VedAnti, Bhattar blessed him by saying "nammudaiya JIyar vandAr (Our jiyar has come"). He asked the VedAnti not to leave his presence even for a moment and taught him all the SAstrAs and their meanings. Since Bhattar called VedAnti as "nammudaiya jIyar" and blessed him, he was fondly called as "நஞ்சீயர் nam jIyar" by all.

Once NanjIyar asked Bhattar, "Why the Chandra PushkaraNi (temple tank at Srirangam) is the resting place of Namperumal and what is your view on this?" Bhattar replied, "Perumal landed on the banks of a pond only after Ganjendran called, 'Oh Narayana! ManivannA! nAkaNaiyAi!' Is it not for saving Gajendran? Whereas now he is resting here so that he will save me even before I could call him. He is resting in the place where I am trapped. Your question is not out of your own curiosity. Through you, Periya Perumal is reminding me and blessing me".

YatrA to TiruvaNai

Bhattar started on a pilgrimage to TiruvaNai (Setukkarai/Tirupullani). NanjIyar accompanied his AcAryAn. After a strenuous long day of walking, Bhattar was tired. As such, on that night he lay down with his [[153]] head on the lap of NanjIyar and slept. NanjIyar sat still without even changing the position of his legs for fear of disturbing the sleep of his AcAryan. The deep devotion that a disciple has to show to his AcAryan was thus exemplified to the whole world by NanjIyar.

They took bath at TiruvaNai. Both of them returned to Srirangam. Midway they arrived at a village named Paatiri in the night. They reached the house of a hunter. On seeing Bhattar, the hunter got up, prostrated before him and offered him a seat. He appealed to Bhattar to be seated. Bhattar took that seat while NanjIyar sat on the floor right next to Bhattar. Bhattar told NanjIyar, "Oh jIyar! This hunter has not extended courtesies knowing about our vaibhavam. He is also not reciprocating for the sake of any help we did to him. He is doing all this just because we entered his home and took shelter here. Is it not? I wonder what the SaraNyan (BhagavAn) will think of those who took shelter under Him!" Then he asked the hunter, "What is your profession? How do you manage your everyday living? Tell us of anything that you might think is special". The hunter replied "SvAmin! I belong to the hunting tribe. I used to go to the forest to hunt. This morning something wonderful happened. I caught hold of a baby rabbit in the forest and I was walking along. The mother rabbit came in front of me and prayed to me profusely. When I saw that, I took pity and left the baby rabbit there itself". On hearing this, Bhattar was surprised.

He told NanjIyar, "No one did upadeSam to the rabbit, "mAmekam SaraNam vraja". Likewise nobody preached the hunter "hariH prANAn parityajya rakshitavyaH krtAtmanA". Where as SaraNAgati has paid result at once. Such is the glory of SaraNAgati!" Bhattar was very happy. Then they reached Periya Koyil. Bhattar continued with his routine of rendering discourses.

Leaving for Tirukkottiyur

Once, one by the name, Veerasundara BrahmarAyan was building a fortified wall around the temple of Aranganagarappan. He noted that the tirumAligai (house) of PiLLai PiLLai AzhvAn was on the path of the building site. So he thought of demolishing the house and to construct the wall. He appealed this to Bhattar. Bhattar told him, "Do you think the wall that you are building will protect the Lord? Is not the MangaLASAsanam of PiLLai PiLLai AzhvAn protects the Lord? Long ago when Tirumangai AzhvAr built the wall, AzhvAr avoided the house of Tondaradipodi AzhvAr and built the wall around the house. Likewise you may also leave the house with out demolishing and build the wall [[154]] around the home". Veerasundaran ignoring the advice of Bhattar, demolished the house of PiLLai PiLLai AzhvAn and built the wall. Further he started troubling Bhattar notwithstanding the fact that Bhattar is the son of his AcAryan. Bhattar was upset at his behaviour and so left Srirangam to stay in Tirukkottiyur.

Even though Bhattar was physically present at Tirukkottiyur, his thoughts were in Srirangam only. He kept thinking and was telling himself, "I lost the bhAgyam of worshipping Ranganathan. When I am going to get the darSan of Him?" Thus saying Bhattar was in a tearful state. One SrI VaishNavar approached Bhattar and requested for the kAlakshepam on Tiruviruttam. Bhattar called NanjIyar and asked him to do the kAlakshepam of Tiruviruttam to the SrI VaishNavar. Since I am deprived of the darSan of Aranganagarappan, I am in a sad state and not even able to speak and so very depressed. AS such, you do the kAlakshepam on Tiruviruttam".

After a few days, Veerasundaran who tormented Bhattar died. The SrI VaishNavAs of Srirangam coming to know of this were telling that Bhattar's enemy is dead and were happy. They with great joy, informed Andal, Bhattar's mother about this. On hearing this, Andal closed the door of the house and was crying and wept. The SrI VaishNavAs were confused and wondered at this reaction. The sinner as well as the enemy who troubled and caused Bhattar to leave Srirangam is dead. They wondered as to why in stead of being happy about this sinner's death, she is grieving over his death. They were talking that with the death of the enemy of Bhattar, and doubted whether Bhattar and others will return to Srirangam and all of them can be together again. On hearing this, Andal said. "Oh immature boys! All of you seem to be not aware of anything. Veerasundaran being the disciple of AzhvAn committed a grave injustice to AzhvAn's son by his ignominious act and committed a sin. He could have prostrated at the feet of Bhattar and could have said that he has committed a grave sin due to ignorance and sought his pardon at his the holy feet. She said, "He never felt any remorse for his ignominious act and he died. He will be taken by the messengers of Lord Yama and he will undergo torture by them. He failed to benefit from liberation of the soul being the disciple of AzhvAn. Had he lived for some more time he might have at least enjoyed the worldly pleasures. He was denied of that too because of his untimely death. I am deeply disturbed thinking about the soul which took shelter under the holy feet of AzhvAn is undergoing such trouble. I am very upset. You are all not aware of this". [[155]] The SrI VaishNavAs were moved by the greatness of the clan of AzhvAn who exhibited care and affection, with full of concern even for those who committed grievous mistake.

On hearing the news of the death of Veerasundaran, PiLLai PiLLai AzhvAn went to Tirukkottiyur. He informed Bhattar of the news and brought Bhattar back to Srirangam. Bhattar was very happy to be back in Srirangam and worshipped SrI Ranganathan and continued with his discourses to his disciples for several years.

The aspect of PurushArtham (PurushArtha kAshThA)

One person named ammaNiyAzhvAn walking a very long distance came to Bhattar and prostrated at him. He prayed to Bhattar to bless him with the upadeSam of special meaning that would be beneficial to him. Bhattar did the upadeSam on the meaning from NammAzhvAr's pAsurams of "neDumARkaDimai". He concluded by saying, "To be able to understand EmperumAn is the purpose of life and this is like eating food to fill half the hunger, where as knowing and serving the devotees of the Perumal only makes one to fully know Him". (bhAgavata Seshatvam is the superior PurushArtham).

nyakrodabIje vaTavat praNave SaptajAlavat | sitte tadhIyaSeshatve sarvArthAH sambhavanti hi ||

Just as how a big banyan tree grows out of a small banyan seed, just as how all the SabdArtham are in PraNavam, just by taking shelter under the feet of the devotees of the Lord, one will attain all PurushArthams. This is the pramANam.

Think of the Seashore front

Veera SikhAmaNi PallavarAyan, a local king came to see Bhattar and prostrated before him. He told Bhattar that because of his busy royal duties, he could not find time to listen to any of the discourses on the vaibhavam of BhagavAn. He prayed to Bhattar to do upadeSam on special meanings which are beneficial to him. Bhattar told him to think about the seashore. PallavarAyan said that he could not understand the meaning. Bhattar then said. "Seventy crores strong army of monkeys after marching long distance were tired and sleeping on the seashore. At that time Lord Rama and His younger brother Lakshmana armed with the bow and arrow were marching around the monkey army throughout the night to safeguard them like mobile fortifications. [[156]] You may surrender unto the holy hand and the bows held by that hand of the Chakravarthi Tirumagan and feel secure and be happy". The essence of the message is - "The Lord protects us when we are asleep. Is it required to pray to him for safeguarding us when we are awake?"

Will never wait at the doorstep of the wealthy

On hearing the glory of Bhattar, one by the name, Tribhuvana VeeradevarAyan asked Bhattar to come one day to his place. Bhattar replied to him, "EmperumAn said 'etat vratam mama' and he is the Supreme Saviour of those who surrenders to Him. His palm is in the posture of let go off the fear and I am here to take care of you (abhaya mudrA). Even if He denies being my saviour, I will never wait and stand at the doorstep of the wealthy people seeking their help".

Another person asked Bhattar, "Why do the SrI VaishNavAs ignore other devatAs". Bhattar replied, “When there is contradiction to the pramANams, there may be a doubt. But here, there is no doubt because of the irrefutable pramANams".

SrIvaishNava lakshaNam

One day Bhattar asked a SrI VaishNavar who sought refuge under his holy feet to go to AnatAzhvAn's place and ask him to clarify as to what constitutes the marks (lakshaNams) of a VaishNava. He went to the house of AnantAzhvAn. That day there was a tadhIyArAdhanam at the house of AnantAzhvAn. Many SrI VaishNavAs were taking food at the house. There was no place for this SrI VaishNavar to sit. He waited outside at the front of the house till the group of SrI VaishNavAs finished eating. AnantAzhvAn came to the place where the SrI VaishNavar was sitting and apologised for keeping him unattended and told him, "You have been waiting for long without taking food and seem to be tired." He took the SrI VaishNavar inside the house and served him food. Then AnantAzhvAn took the food. He then asked the SrI VaishNavar the purpose of his visit. The Sri VaishNavar told AzhvAn that Bhattar has sent him to seek answers about the SrI VaishNava lakshaNam. AnantAzhvAn replied that a VaishNava will be like a crane (kokku), like a hen (kOzhi), like salt and like you. The essence of this statement is that a true VaishNavan would seek a tadhIya Seshatvam (belonging to the Lord/subservient) and choose it over j~nAna anushThAna abhimAnam (pursuit of knowledge) instead seeking kaimkaryams at the sacred feet of bhAgavatAs, who are dear to BhagavAn and not aspiring to be in the forefront of the group of VaishNavAs and has to conduct himself patiently. [[157]] Reforming the disciple

One SrI VaishNava was undergoing kAlakshepam under Bhattar. At one stage the vaishNavar succumbed to temptations and got drawn in to wicked circle of friends. He approached Bhattar and told him, "SvAmin, henceforth there is no connection whatsoever between you and me". Bhattar said, "Dear Son? Is this your thinking? Even if you distance yourself, I will not let go off you". The VaishNavar walked away but Bhattar forcibly brought him back and gave him good counsel and with constant effort reformed the SrI VaishNavar and took him under his inner circle (antaranga Sishya). The SrI VaishNavar realised his wrong doings and got reformed. This incident indicates that the duty of a good AcAryan is to reform the Sishya even if he tries to distance himself due to his inappropriate knowledge.

Admiration of Self (Atma praSamsA) to be avoided

Once Tiruvarangadamudanar hating Bhattar told him, "You were born out of வெற்றிலைச் செருக்கிலே (literally meaning out of betel leaf essence) meaning proud of your lineage of AzhvAn, whereas I was born out of j~nAnam (the intellectual essence) of AzhvAn". Here, Amudanar in a mood of self admiration (Atma praSamsA) implied that his own AcArya bhakti was far superior to that of Bhattar. In this context, Amudanar quoted a TiruvAimozhi pAsuram, 3-6-8, "துயரமே தரு tuyarame taru". Bhattar responded thus, "This is a beautiful pAsuram. Devareer yourself stated about your adoration of your AcAryan. This is nothing but self admiration"

In the midst of service to the Lord, there is no blemish for elapsed time (kAlAtItam)

One day, Namperumal reached a MaNTapam inside the temple after the procession through the streets. Bhattar was rendering the tiruAlavaTTa kaimkaryam (using the hand held fan gently to serve the Lord). One of the disciples of Bhattar told him that the time for performing sandhyavandanam is elapsing. Bhattar told him that for the one who is performing service to the Lord, elapsed time does not matter and so no blemish (kAlAtIta dosham). This means, if one is involved in the service of the Lord he should not stop that service in the midst and go for observing daily rituals (nityakarmAnushThAnam).



[[158]] White Royal Umbrella

Several scholars assembled together to enter into a debate with Bhattar. Bhattar being a master of all subjects (sarvaj~nar) won over them effortlessly.

Further, they wanted to test his mastery and kept a serpent inside a pot and asked Bhattar as to what is inside. Bhattar replied them nonchalantly saying "திருவெண்கொற்றக் குடை tiruveNkoRRak kuDai", The Holy (white) umbrella of the Lord is there inside”. They removed the cover and the serpent emerged out of the pot. They asked "Is this the veN koRRrakkuDai?" Bhattar replied, "Yes. Is it not the pAsuram of AzhvAr says, சென்றால் குடையாம் cenRAl kuDaiyAm" The scholars were happy on noticing the mastery of Bhattar.

Answers to the questions of jIyar

The NanjIyar asked Bhattar, "Why is it that names of the several divyadeSa temples are mentioned by AzhvAr in his pAsurams, 'ஒரு நற்சுற்றம் oru narcuRram' (Tirumangai AzhvAr's Periya tirumozhi pAsurams, 10-1). Bhattar replied that it is just like the newly wed bride about to leave for her husband's home, visits all the houses of her relatives to take leave off them, AzhvAr in these pAsurams is recalling several divya deSa Tiruppatis on this earth (prApya bhUmi) and going to these temples and offers MangaLASAsanam to these divya deSa EmperumAns.

When the jIyar asked, "Is it essential for one to be ritually pure in the body to recite the tirunAmam of EmperumAn?" Bhattar’s answered thus, "When some one is going to River Ganga to have his bath, will he take a bath in a salt water pond? The recital of the name of the EmpurumAn which is going to shower abundant blessing on the person will also cleanse his mind and body".

Sugreeva Maharaja said, "I will not permit Vibheeshanan to enter here and seek refuge". But Lord Rama said, "If he is not allowed to take refuge I am not what I am". The jIyar asked, "Why this two different positions by these two?" Bhattar pointed out, "Both of them are saying that they will not turn back the person seeking refuge". This meant Rama took refuge with Sugreevan, saying 'sugrIvam SaraNam gataH'. Realising his responsibility of protecting the person who took refuge under him, fearing some harm may occur through the brother of the enemy, Sugreevan mentioned. "I will not permit Vibheeshanan to take [[159]] refuge here". Since Vibheeshanan took refuge saying "rAghavam SaraNam gataH', Lord Rama felt it is his duty to offer him refuge and safeguard him.

The next question - "What is the benefit of surrendering to the Lord through the grace of PirATTi?" Bhattar answered thus, "kAkAsuran committed the most evil sin to tAyAr but tAyAr only saved his life from the wrath of the Lord. Even though Ravana's evil act was not as bad as that of kAkAsuran, his heads were cut-off by the Lord because PirATTi's presence was not there. When SrI Rama told Lakshmanan to stay at Ayodhya, PiraTTi interceded and so Lakshmanan could accompany SrI Rama. By the grace of PirATTi, Guha and Vibheeshanan could achieve PurushArtham".

One must wear dress and AbharaNams

During the vasantotsavam for Namperumal, Bhattar decorating well with clothes and ornaments went to the temple for performing tiruvAlavaTTa kaimkaryam. At that time, the disciples of Bhattar posed a question, "You used to say that the continuous thought of the divine feet of the Lord is the ornament and decoration for us and we don't have to decorate ourselves. Then, why now are you decorating yourself like this?" Bhattar responded, "When Perumal is brought to the MaNTapam, the pillars of the MaNTapam are decorated. Similarly when I am going to perform the tiruvAlavaTTa kaimkaryam should I not decorate myself?"

Paramapadam to a deranged person

On the direction of EmperumAnAr, Bhattar started on his travel to Sarada pITham. There he presented the SrI BhAshyam to Saradadevi. Taking permission of the Devi, he returned back. On the way he worshipped Tiruvengadamudaiyan at Tirumalai. On his return journey to Srirangam, a woman with mental disorder was in a very pathetic state. She observed several people prostrating at the feet of Bhattar, she also prostrated before Bhattar. Bhattar looked at her with full of grace and asked her "What do you want?" She replied that she wants Paramapadam. Bhattar blessed her, saying, "So be it”. He reached Srirangam and offered worship at the sannidhi of Udaiyavar.

Periya tiruvaDi is above

Bhattar had two wives. On seeing them, one SrI VaishNava asked Bhattar, "Svamin, there are two serpents on your sides. How do you [[160]] manage to tide over the samsAric bondage?" Bhattar replied to him saying, "The almighty Lord is there to take care and so no need to do anything by us. When the serpents on both my sides make a hissing noise, Periya tiruvaDi (Garudan) who is orbiting above will keep them under control".

Delightful deliberations (SantoshArtha vicAram)

One day Bhattar went to the sannidhi of EmperumAnAr and paid his obeisance. Referring to Chakravarti Tirumagan, Bhattar appealed to Udaiyavar to bless him like Lord Rama, when He was present in this Earth. EmperumAnAr understood the intuitive thought of Bhattar and said through the arcaka that He never insisted on "mAmekam SaraNam vraja”. Bhattar further added, "Not only that. I will tell you about his vratam (vow) and listen. Kannan told Arujuna to surrender at His feet (mAmekam SaraNam vraja). But, Chakravarti Tirumagan, Sri Rama vowed to protect all beings and any one irrespective of whether one is a sinner or a good one (abhayam sarvabhUtebhyo dadAmi etadvratam mama). Kannan does not have this nature (svabhAvam).

At that time, Tirunaraiyur araiyar told Bhattar, "The nest weaved by the swallow bird (weaver bird) is not going to be dismantled by anyone. Similarly the bondage created by the Almighty according to ones karma cannot be untied by the human being. Only if we surrender to the Almighty Lord, the SaraNyan, the bondage can be untied. Otherwise it will not be possible to untie this bondage by anybody. Therefore one has to recite the carama Slokam "mAmekam SaraNam vraja".

"Is not NammAzhvAr in his pAsuram said on Chakravarti Tirumagan as தன்தனக்கென்று நின்றானை tan tanakenRu ninRAnai?" This type of state (samAdhikarAhityam) will be exhibited neither in Paramapadam nor in KsheerAbdi vyuha states. Only in the VibhavAvatAram, by not exhibiting His Supremacy (paratvam), He abides by the direction of His father and mother (matru pitru vacana paripAlanam). This attribute is not exhibited in any of the incarnations other than the incarnation of Rama”. Thus Sottai Nambi, tirukkumArar (son) of SrI Alavandar observed.

On hearing the above, CiRiyAttAn said, “Kannan immediately after His birth, abided by the word of His father (pitru vacana paripAlanam). As an infant and child, He allowed Himself to be tied and to be beaten by Nandagopan and YaSoda thus exhibiting His simplicity. He went as a [[161]] messenger for the five PandavAs, He was charioteer for Arjuna's chariot, stopped the chariot just by the mere signs of the eyes of Arjuna, bearing the arrows on his chest, saving from death, resurrected the dead ones and so on. Such attributes were not present in your Rama. Therefore, NammmAzvAr's pAsura vAkyams, 'தன் தனக்கென்று நின்றானை tan tanakenRu ninRAnai' is attributed to Krishna only".

On listening to this, Vedavyasa Bhattar asserted, saying, "There is none of the Kshatriya Kings could ask Chakravarti Tirumagan to be his messenger. In fact Lord Rama enjoyed the service of Hanuman when he acted as the messenger between Him and PirATTi and envied that role so much so, He felt He could not play such a role. He fulfilled that wish by incarnating as Krishna. Tirumangai AzhvAr sings in praise of this in his pAsuram thus,

முன்னோர் தூது வானரத்தின் வாயில் மொழிந்து அரக்கன் மன்னூர் தன்னை வாளியினால் மாளமுனிந்து, அவனே பின்னோர் தூது ஆகி மன்னர்க்காகிப் பெருநிலத்தார் இன்னார் தூதன் என நின்றான் எவ்வுள் கிடந்தானே.

munnOr tUdu vAnarattin vAyil mozhintu arakkan mannUr tannai vALiyinAl mALamunintu, avanE pinnOr tUdu Agi manarkkAgip perunilattAr innAr tUdan ena ninRAn evvuL kiDantAnE.
--- Periya tirumozhi 2-2
On hearing this, AruLAlapperumal EmperumAnAr, quoting from NammAzhvAr's pAsuram of "பத்துடையடியவர்க்கு எளியவன் pattuDaiyaDiyavarkku eLiyavan" (TiruvAimozhi 1-3-1) and "எத்திறம் உரலினோடு இணைந்திருந்து ஏங்கிய எளிவே ettiRam uralinODu iNaintiruntu Engiya eLivE", says, this caused AzhvAr to be thrown in to a trance and remained in that state for six months. Such is the saulabhyam of Krishna.

AruLAlapperumal EmperumAnAr continued to say thus, "At the end of the incarnation (avAtAra samApti), Chakravarti Tirumagan gave moksham to all of His citizens. He Himself along with the people who took refuge in Him and also the plants, animals all were given the [[162]] VaikuNTha prApti ('புற்பா முதலாப் புல்வெறும்பாதி ஒன்றின்றியே நற்பாலுக்குய்த்தனன் puRpA mudalAp pulveRumbAdi onRrinRriyE naRpAlukkuyttanavan'). Can we say the same about the other? At the conclusion of the incarnation, Krishna and His offspring and the entire clan of Yadavas killing each other using the reed as a weapon and the entire race was destroyed. Lord Krishna left His tirumEni (physical body) in the earth itself and returned to His abode, SrI VaikuNTham. Hence, the greatness lies with the One who Himself along with those who took refuge under Him reached Svargam/VaikuNTham). Is not such greatness attributed to those who took refuge under Him too?"

Bhattar concluded the deliberations by quoting Ramanujar, "It is not so. Krishna brought the Sankhanidhi and Padmanidhi and other nidhis like SudharmA from His court (SabhA), pArijAta tree and other such fragrant articles, Kuberan, the Lord of wealth and other devAtAs et al and kept them in Dwaraka. Did His offspring or relatives or citizens enjoy the anubhavam of Svargam with these things? They merely remained as father, son or blood related ones. Hence when the AtmA leaves the physical body, it takes to another physical body. Since Krishna, the GitAcAryan blessed us with 'carama Slokam', it is clear that AtmA sambandham (relation with the Self) as well AtmAnubhavam (perception of the AtmA) are both with ParamAtmA. Therefore, as long as the AtmA is present and we perform SaraNAgati through a sadacAryan, we are assured of Moksham and there is no doubt in this".

Whenever Bhattar was presenting his kAlakshepam, one scholarly person used to come often and listen to the discourse. On seeing him, Bhattar will say, "Welcome”. When he leaves, Bhattar used to send him back in a normal way. One good VaishNavar not knowledgeable in SAstrAs used to come to pay his obeisance to Bhattar. On seeing him, Bhattar used to receive him with respect. When he leaves also, Bhattar used to extend all due courtesies and enquire about his well being etc., and then send him back. One of the disciples who was observing this daily asked Bhattar, "SvAmin, you are not extending courtesies to the scholarly person but just receive him in a normal way. But why are you highly courteous to the person who is not quite knowledgeable in SAstrAs?" Bhattar asked the disciple to be present here when they both come next day and that he himself will know the reason.

Next day morning, the scholarly person came to see Bhattar. Bhattar received him as usual and asked him as to whom he is considering as the Superior Entity (paratattvam). He replied that a few pramANams [[163]] (factual proof) assert Brahma, a few as VishNu, and some Rudran as ParadevatA. So, it is not possible to definitely conclude as to who is ParadevatA. Then, the SrI VaishNavar came. Bhattar received him as usual and asked him, "Devareer! Whom do you consider as the Superior Entity?" The SrI VaishNavar replied, "SriyaHpati SrIman Narayanan is the paratattvam. I don't know of anyone other than Him". Bhattar asked his disciples who were nearby and listening, "Do you now realise the difference in their depth of knowledge? This is the reason why I am showing my spontaneity and respect to this SrI VaishNavar but merely received the other person in a normal, common way".

Bhattar's question

DuSAsana, the son of the blind king, DhrutarAshTra caught hold of the hair of Draupadi, who was in her menstrual cycle at that time, dragged her to the royal court. He insulted her saying that she is their slave and started disrobing her. Draupadi tried her best to save her honor. When she could not do, she rememeberd about the Slokam of VasishTa BhagavAn "mahatyApati samprApte smartavyo bhagavAn hariH". Then she prayed --

Sankha cakra gadApANe dvArakAnilaya acyuta | govinda puNDarIkAksha raksha mAm SaraNAgatAm || hA krshNa dvArakAvAsa! kvAsi! yAdavanandana | imAm avasthAm samprAptAm anAthAm kim upekshase || and surrendered to BhagavAn.

Bhattar asked EmpAr thus. "In that royal court, her five husbands, who were extremely strong physically and who has travelled wide and far to win over several kings, were present. Highly knowledgeable Bheeshma, Drona and others were present. Her relatives DhrutarAshTra and family were there. There were several others present who are aware of the right and wrong dharma and adharamA. Leaving all these people aside why should Draupadi invoke the name of Krishna who is far away?" EmpAr replied that she might have asked KrishnA even before that whenever she prays to him to come and help her.

Bhattar - When her husbands were present in the royal court, what people in the court will think if she calls some one other than her husbands for help? [[164]] EmpAr - We know that a woman when walking with her husband, holding his hand and if she slips, she will call 'ammA'. This is commonly heard. Likewise Draupadi is seeking the saviour to save her. Moreover being a learned woman of high intellect, she would have prayed per the words of VasishTa BhagavAn and did her SaraNAgati.

Bhattar – If she is praying to the Rakshakan (saviour), why should she mention the name?

EmpAr- In that dangerous situation, her dress kept growing because of the glory of the name of the Lord. Further because of her helplessness, she said Govinda.

Periya Perumal is proud

Even at the age of twenty eight, Bhattar as usual was reciting KaiSika PurANam at the sannidhi of Periya Perumal on KaiSika dvAdaSi day. He elaborated on the meanings and commentaries on the various aspects of the KaiSika PurANam. Hearing such a delectable recitation, Periya Perumal was very proud and happy. He presented His garland, tiruparivaTTam, AbhAraNams etc., to Bhattar. Perumal also offered Bhattar His simhAsanam, the divine seat and presented several other gifts to Bhattar. The Lord felt that He has not given anything. He wondered as to what would be the fitting gift to Bhattar. Perumal happily told Bhattar, "Oh Bhattar! We will give you mElaiveeDu/SrI VaikuNTham". Bhattar happily accepted saying “mahA prasAdam”. The other people who were present were stunned and wondered as to whether this kind of gift one can accept. They were depressed. Bhattar prostrated at the feet of Periya Perumal and appealed to Him with folded hands, "Oh Auspicious One! You told Arjuna 'mokshayishyAmi' which I knew through my AcAryAs. You, Yourself have blessed Moksham because of EmperumAnAr who initiated aDiyEn to your Holy Feet, the tirumEni sambandham (blood relationship) of AzhvAn and the blessings of EmpAr only". He worshipped Periya Perumal and Namperumal from tip of the toes to head (ApAdacUDam), took leave and returned to his holy abode. He prostrated at the feet of his mother Andal. She blessed him, "நலமந்தமில்லதோர் நாடு புகுவீர் nalamantamillAdOr nADu puguvIr". Bhattar appealed to her, "ammA, this is what aDiyEn wanted".

Then all the Sri VaishNavAs of Srirangam gathered in huge numbers at the tirumAligai of Bhattar to have food. At that time, Bhattar was doing the discourse on TiruneDumtANDakam. When explaining the [[165]] meaning of the pAsuram "அலம்புரிந்த நெடுந்தடக்கை alampurinta neDuntaDakkai" (pAsuram 6), Bhattar was elaborating on "அஞ்சிறைப்புள் தனிப்பாகன் anciRaippuL tanippAkan", he visualised Tiruvengadamudaiyan seated on top of Periya tiruvaDi. Bhattar worshipped Him and was immensely happy. When he was reciting twice the pAsura vAkyams - "பறவையேறு பரம்புருடா நீ என்னைக்கைகொண்டபின் பிறவி என்னும் கடலும் வற்றி பெரும்பதமாகின்றதால் paRavaiyERu parampuruDA nI ennaikkaikoNDapin piRavi ennum kaDalum vaRRi perumpadamAginRatAl" - folded his hands over his head with a smiling face, meditated upon the Lord and lay down. His soul departed through the brahmarandram (hole on the middle of the skull) to the Holy Abode of SrIman Narayanan. The disciples of Bhattar rushed and told his mother. Andal coming running, hugged her son. She did not shed tears on his ascendance to SrI VaikuNTham but said, "The owner has taken back His property and should we grieve for that?" She added, "Sri VaikuNThanAthan has taken Bhattar and this would have caused distress and grief to Perumal and NacchiyArs of Srirangam whereas SrI VaikuNThanAthan and His consorts will be very happy in getting the precious wealth". All the residents of Srirangam were grief- stricken. NanjIyar fell like an uprooted tree and cried. Later, NanjIyar and others organised the final rites of brahmameda samskAram with temple honours through SrIrAma Pillai. After avabhruda snAnam, all of them left. NanjIyar covering his head and his entire body with cloth went back to his maTham through the back door.

Perumal and the NacchiyArs had Tirumanjanam and were distressed about losing Their son. They avoided nivedanams.

When Andal and others returned to the tirumAligai and noticed the desolate state, the younger brother of Bhattar, SrIrAma Pillai became emotional and grief-stricken. He cried uncontrollably. Andal noticed this and said, "He is not the son of AzhvAn" and angrily told him, "Oh son! You seem to be envious of Bhattar for the great position he has attained, but you are seeking relationship/consanguinity (j~nAtitvam)". On hearing these words, SrIrAma Pillai consoled himself, got up and prostrated at the feet of Andal and prayed saying that he committed a great apacAram and asked for her pardon. All the rituals of Bhattar were completed by him scrupulously.

Then, he went to the temple to worship Perumal. Perumal consoled him saying, "We have lost Bhattar. But We are here for you. Do not grieve”. SrIrAma Pillai partook the tIrtha prasAdam of Perumal. As [[166]] directed by Perumal, he was escorted back to his holy abode with the paraphernalia. He was conducting discourses on the siddhAnta granthams.

Granthams blessed by Bhattar

1. SahasranAma BhAshyam 5. SrIguNaratnakoSam 2. ashTaSloki 6. SrIrangarAjastavam 3. tatvaratnAkaram 7. KriyAdIpam 4. PraNavavivaraNam 8. tatvatraya Slokam

taniyan

श्रीपराशरभट्टार्यः श्रीरङ्गपुरोहितः। श्रीवत्साङ्कसुतः श्रीमान् श्रेयसे मेऽस्तु भूयसे॥

SrIparASarabhaTTAryaH SrIrangapurohitaH | SrIvatsAnkasutaH SrImAn Srayse me astu bhUyase ||

**** 






[[167]]
