+++
title = "02 EVACUATION OF THE URINE AND THE FAECES"

+++

Taking the materials necessary for his bath such as fresh clothes, darbha, rice and sesamum and holding in his hand a bamboo stick and repeating "Śrī Kēśavāya namah" (I am praying to Kēśava the name of God) he leaves his house. After going a certain distance, he places the materials he takes with him in a place which is clean and determined by him. The place he chooses for taking mud must be one in which no worms are found, not ploughed by a plough, not found mixed with fine 'alar' (soft mud), not mixed up with unholy things, not mingled with soil used by others and free from ant-hills. From such a place he takes enough mud and places this mud close to the place where he is to wash himself. Leaving his sandals he is to slap his palms thrice and then wrap round his head his upper or other cloth. He next winds round his right-ear his sacred thread so that it may not be dangling. His face and mouth are covered with his upper cloth, and then he sits for defaecation. Before sitting for this he should strew the ground with leaves that are dried and those not useful for sacrificial purposes. If the time is twilight or morning he should sit facing north and if the time is night he is expected to sit facing south. While sitting for this he should not speak with any person. He is not expected to sit for defæcation and be seeing temples, rivers, cows, brahmans, fire, sun, moon, air and Ficus religiosa tree. For this purpose he should avoid using the places such as the following:-"Flower garden, groves, tulsi gardens, crops, smaśānam (burning ground), alkaline land, hill, ant-hill, pits, unclean spot, sand, shade, ways and paths, water, ploughed land, cowsheds, foot of trees, darbha grown spot, rivers, tanks, sea shore, places where cow dung is stored, yajñabhūmi (place where yajña is performed), [[०५६]]

[[५१]]
grassy-plot, spaces in front of dwelling houses, crevices of rocks or stones and places where insects abound. He should not see the leavings During defæcation he is not to use wet clothes. During the time he sits for this process he is not to spit. As a matter of fact spitting is prohibited during the process of defæcation.
