+++
title = "03 WASHING (ŚAUCHAM)"

+++

After defaecation he goes to a place where he has to wash himself taking the mud already secured in his right hand. He divides this mud into four parts and water is to be poured for use by a servant. If, on the other hand, washing is to be done in a pond, mud need not be brought. Rivers and watering places that are near temples or near God should never be used for purposes of washing after passing the faeces. While washing in ponds mud should not be brought from any other place From a place under water, which is as deep as the hand up to the wrists upper limit (a depth of ९ to १० inches), mud must be taken and it should be placed on the ground about ९ to १० inches away from the edge of the water, after sprinkling that space with water Then this mud is used for washing along with water. The left hand is used for washing. It is to be placed between the knees of the two legs and the right hand is kept outside the knees to the right. With his right hand he takes the mud and puts it into his left hand. If passing of the urine and faeces had been done at the same time, cleaning for the faeces has to be done first, and then for urination. If the process of urination and defaecation are at different times, the cleaning has to be done according to the process which has taken place earlier. The cleaning for urination is done by using the mud for cleaning six times and for the passing of the faeces it has to be used twelve or fifteen times. Between one cleaning and another the left hand has to be cleaned five or six times with mud and water. While doing the cleaning for urination, mud about the size of a nellikai (fruit of Phyllanthus emblica) has to be used. For cleaning for defaecation for the first time a handful of mud, for the second and the third time half of this quantity and for the remaining or subsequent washings mud about the size of two nelli fruits should be used.

After using the hand for doing the washing once, it has to be washed with mud and water to clean it, and then it is again used for the purpose of washing. During the process of washing the hand enough water should be used, so that all the mud may be well removed from the hand. If the thigh and other parts are soiled they should be cleaned seven times.

Then getting up he should clean his left hand ten times with mud and water and his legs seven times with water similarly. Both his hands have to be cleaned ten or seven times with clean water. If it is only after urination, three or five washings with mud and water are enough. The left hand has to be washed five times using mud and water, and then both the hands, three times only, with pure water. Then the finger nails have to be cleaned and washed properly. The place used for washing has also to be cleaned. If sperm has come out without one's knowledge along with the urine all the processes have to be done twice as much as for urination. During the day time the processes have thus to ७-A [[०५७]]
[[५२]]

be calculated. During night time half of this has to be done. While travelling only onefourth of the above may be done. As far as women are concerned they have to do only half of the number of times that a male has to do. Brahmacharis have to do twice as many times; Vanaprasthas and monks have to do four times as much. For people who are not well in health the cleanings have to be done according to their strength, ie., as many times as they can stand. The point to be observed in such cases is only removal of bad things, smell and in cases of piles pain is to be avoided during the cleaning. After the washings he proceeds and on reaching water side he washes his hand and feet well. He also washes his mouth by means of water four or six times if after urination and eight to twelve times if after defaecation. After washing his mouth he puts on his sacred thread (Yajñōpavitam) properly and does achamanam twice or thrice.
