+++
title = "04 SIPPING OF THE WATER (ACHAMANAM)"

+++

The sipping of the water or achamanam with the proper mentality and mantras is enjoined on all occasions as a purificatory thing. So when the ceremonies or the usual daily observances of any kind are to be begun achamanam has to be performed. For doing achamanam one should sit in a clean place, not squatting, but on feet and knees facing east or north Both the hands are to be kept inside the knees. Touching the hand with the left hand he takes in his right hand as much water as would just be sufficient to drown a seed of black-gram. Then repeating the mantram "Om achyutaya namah" (I bow to Achyuta) he sips water; this process of sipping water is repeated twice more repeating each time the mantrams "Om anantāya namaḥ” (I bow to Ananta)

and "Om Govindaya nanah" (I bow to Govinda) respectively. After sipping three times with the base of the right thumb he wipes his lips twice and then touches the various parts of the body one after the other repeating the appropriate mantras again, after washing the base of the thumb and wiping, as detailed below :- First with the tip of the right thumb of his right hand he touches the right and left cheeks repeating the mantras "Om kēśavāya namah" (I bow to Kēśava) and "Om Nārāyanāya namaḥ" (I bow to Narayana). Then touching the ring-finger at its base with the tip of the thumb bring the tip of the ring finger in contact with the right eye repeating the mantra "Om Madhavaya namah" (I bow to Madhava) and touching the left eye repeat "Om Govindaya namah" (I bow to Govinda). With the tip of the fore finger, whilst the thumb is at its base he touches the right and left sides of the nose repeating the mantras "Om Vishnavēnamah" (I bow to Vishnu) and "Om Madhusūdanaya namah" (I bow to Madhusūdana). With the little finger and the thumb at its base he touches the two ears saying the mantras "Om Trivikramaya namah" (I bow to Trivikrama) and "Om Vamanāya namah" (I bow to Vamana). With the middle finger and with the thumb at its base he touches the right and the left shoulders repeating "Om Śrīdharāya namaḥ" (I bow to Śrīdhara) and "Om Hrshikeśāya namaḥ" (I bow to Hrshikēśa). With the right palm touch the navel repeating "Om Padmanabhaya namah" (I bow to Padmanabha) and with all the fingers united the head is touched pronouncing the words "Om Damodaraya namah" (I bow to Damodara).

[[०५८]]