+++
title = "06 BATHING OR SNANAM"

+++

One who intends bathing in a tank or river should go to a place where God is usually brought or where Bhagavatās bathe. Selecting such a place he should clean with water the place he intends sitting, wash his legs and hands and then sit on this space facing east or north. While sitting he should wear on his ring-finger of the righthand the pavitra, usually of darbha grass twisted, and do prānāyāmam three times.

The method of doing pranayamam is described below---The pranāyāmam an important item and it is resorted to in almost every ceremony and at frequent intervals in each.

[[०५९]]
[[५४]]

The left nostril is pressed down by the little and ring-fingers of the right-hand and the air inside the lungs is expired through the right nostril. The right nostril is then pressed by the thumb of the right hand so that the right nostril is closed and the two fingers on the left nose are released. As much air as can be taken in is drawn in by the left nostril and then both the nostrils are pressed and the eyes and the mouth are closed. In this condition, think of God, and the sapta Vyahrtis, Gayatri and Gayatri's head are then pronounced thrice After this all the air taken in is expired out through the right nostril and the right ear is touched pronouncing the pranavam "Om." Then with his hands in the posture of prayer he repeats the usual hierarchy of his Acharyas Next he repeats the tithi, varam, and nakshatra after repeating "Śri Govinda "and performs the usual sankalpam for snanam (bath). Repeating of "The bala mantra" and of the "Satvikatyāga mantra" follows. He may also repeat ślokas about "Sacred water" if he knows them and also about Acharyas.

The person who wants to perform these rites should think of service to God and nothing else. He is to repeat the following:- "Svaśēsha bhūtēnamayā svakīyaiścha dehendriyāntahkaraṇaiḥ svakīyairēva kalyā- natamaiḥ aupacharikasāmsparśikābhyavaharikaiḥ bhogairakhilaparijanapariśśhadanvitam svātmānam prītam kārayitumupakramate "-In English this means "God with all his attendants and paraphernalia begins to make Himself pleased with the most auspicious materials which are His own and some of which are intended for doing honour, some for creating pleasure by touch and some for eating, supplied by me who is His servant through my body, senses and mind all of which are given by Him." Next he goes to the side of the water and washes his hands and feet in a clean place, does achamanam and then cleans a space on the shore He then takes a quantity of mud from a clean place repeating the ashtaksharamand places it on the spot already cleaned, dividing it into two parts Taking mud from the larger part he wipes with it his body to remove the dirt from his body and bathes in water. After bathing he sits on the bank, thinks of God and performs the pranayamam thrice. He then takes the other portion of the mud into his left-hand, divides it into three parts and sprinkles water over them separately. Repeating the múla mantra he takes one part from three parts in his hand and does digbandhanam by repeating the astramantram With another part of this mud a pitham is made intended for the water which is to be sprinkled later on. The third part of the mud is used for smearing over the body. He then washes his hands and taking water in both of his hands pours or sprinkles it over the pitha made with one part of the mud. The water thus poured or sprinkled is considered to be the holy water of the Ganges coming from the right foot of God. While pouring the water ashṭakshara is pronounced and again taking water with both his hands and repeating the mūlamantra seven times he sprinkles over his head this water three or five times. Next he takes a small quantity of water in his right hand and takes in the same quantity of water repeating the ashtaksharam. After this he performs an achamanam and sprinkling over himself some water, he immerses himself in the water. While under [[०६०]]
[[५५]]
water he should imagine that his head is below the feet of God and he should be repeating the ashtaksharam as many times as he can possibly do. Then he comes out of the water, places his right leg in water and the left leg on the land and then sits. In this posture he does achamanam once. He then stands on the shore and repeats slokas about Acharyas and God and cleans with two cloths his body -with one his head and with another the other parts of his body. Afterwards he sprinkles water thrice repeating the three vyāhṛti mantras over the cloths placed in the "Tiruppakkūdai". Then repeating "Děvasya tva savituḥ prasavēśvinor bahubhyām pūshno hastābhyāmādade." This when translated into English runs: "By the direction of the deity who directs all I take you by the hands of Asvins and by the hands of Pūsha." The cloths are taken and then repeating "Udutyam jātavēdasam dēvam vahanti kētavah dṛśē viśvāya sūryam” which means "The rays support that sun who knows all that are born, so that people may see him" they are shown to the sun. Then repeating the mantram "Avadhūtam raksho avadhūtā arātayah" which means "Let the enemies be destroyed and let those who do not give money perish." The cloths are shaken; with the words "Avahanti vitanvāna kurvāṇā chīra mātmanaḥ . vāsāmsi mamagāvaścha annapānēcha sarvada . tatomē śriyam avaha", which means "First give me wisdom and then bring me prosperity very soon; bring me clothes, cows, food and drink, make them increased and make them remain with me." He wraps the cloth round his head, and then taking his yajñōpavitam (sacred thread) and making it niviti winds it round his right ear and then wears his kaupinam (piece of under cloth). Then he washes his hands and knees with mud and water and wears his lower and upper cloth. After this he washes his feet, does achamanam twice and one prānāyāmam. He then does sankalpam saying "Śrībhagavadājñaya Śrīmannārāyaṇapprītyartham mantrasnānam karishyě" (By God's order and with a view to please Śrīmannarayana I am doing this both by repeating the mantras). Next repeating "Apōhistha mayōbhuvah . tāna urje dadhatana . maheraṇāya chakshase . yōvassivatamo rasah tasya bhajayate hanah . usatīriva mātarah . tasmā aranga mamavah yasyakshayāya jinvatha . apo janayatha chanah . " (for the meaning of this see page ६१) he sprinkles water over legs, head and sky, then over head, sky and legs and finally over sky, head and legs. Then he meditates on bathing and imagines of having bathed. He then thinks of God as existing with the effulgence of a crore of suns, as carrying sankham, chakra and gada in his four hands, and as having a kirita on his head and bracelets and other ornaments. He should think of the feet of God who is holding sankham and chakra, and also think of Ganges falling from the feet on his head and entering his head through the brahmarandhra and cleaning both externally and internally. The wet cloths which he used before while actually bathing must not be placed in front of him but by his side. It he is a weak person he may use hot water for the bath. If, however, he is unclean due to death, etc., he ought not to use hot water. If a person is too weak to bathe the head, he can bathe up to the neck or up to the navel and clean the upper part with a wet cloth. If he is not strong enough even to do this he may adopt any method mentioned in the śastras as suiting his capacity.

[[०६१]]