+++
title = "11 2 UPĀDĀNAM"

+++

During the second yamam he does sankalpa repeating "Krtancha upādānena archayishyāmi." Then he repeats the Balamantra "Bhagavānēva upādānākhyam kārayati" and does satvikatyagam. The person who wants to perform this part of the ceremony is expected to secure flowers, fruits, and other things needed for the worship of God. Only flowers that are clean and found on plants growing in clean situations and those accepted as fit by older Acharyas are to be secured for use. Flowers having good smell, and are beautiful to look at, ghee, milk and curds are to be secured for use. They are to be cleaned properly and kept for use Flowers that are grown by the activity of a person are superior. Those flowers that are secured from plants growing in a wild state are not very good and they have only a medium value. Those purchased in the bazaar are about the worst in value. Flowers secured stealthily or by begging are very bad. Flowers white in colour belong to the class satvika. Red flowers are put under rājasa and blue and black belong to the tamasa class. One should avoid flowers growing on plants found in unclean places; those flowers that are faded, those that are not full, unripe buds, old flowers are also to be avoided; flowers used by any body, flowers smelt, flowers touched by unclean animals, flowers with worms in them are also to be avoided. Flowers of oleander should never be used in houses for God's archana.

All flowers should be secured by repeating "Vīryāya astrayaphat." The leaves of the plants, Achyranthes aspera, Ocimum sanctum, the Bael tree, Ficus religiosa, black tulasi, and vanhi tree may be secured for use. Water flowers such as lotus cannot be accepted two days after plucking. For dhupam the wood of sandal, dēvadaru and ahil are to be used. Things obtained from animals should not be used. But kastūri and gōrōjana, though obtained from animals, may be used for God. With the exception of red lotus, red "Sengashanir," red flowers should not be used for doing puja to God. Flowers and other things meant for the use of God should never be obtained from women of illfame, a wicked fellow who is doing things against caste, a napumsaka and from one who hates God. Things should not be brought and used from any house where no bhagavadarādhana is performed.

Repeating "Samidhaḥ pāvanaḥ pūjyāścharmayuktaḥ paruṭ parah . yushman harami hömārtham asmān rakshantu sarvada" he secures samit-sticks of Butea frondosa. This means "Oh palāsa sticks, you are pure, worthy of adoration, causing happiness to others, endowed with knots. I cut you for the sake of offering to Agni. Protect us always." Darbha is secured by repeating the mantra that follows:--"Virinchena sahotpanna parameshthiparigraha . nuda sarvāṇi pāpāni dharbha svastikaro mama (bhava)." This passage when rendered into English runs thus:---"Born along with Brahma, accepted of him, oh Darbha, remove all (my) sins and give me peace and happiness." Tulasi (sacred basil) is secured by plucking small pieces, so that each may have four leaves and all round young bud of leaves in the centre. While plucking the tulasi the following mantra is repeated:-"Tulasyamſta janmāsi sadātvam kēśavapriyē kēśavārtham lunamitvan varadā bhava śobhane . mokshaikahētōh dharaniprasūtē vishṇossamastasya guroh [[०९०]]
[[८५]]
priyētā ārādhanārtham purushottamasya lūnami patram tuļasi kshamasva." This when translated means:-" Oh Tulasi! you have been born from nectar. You are always fond of Keśava or Vishnu. I cut you for the sake of Kesava. Oh brilliant one! be a granter of boons. Oh one born from Earth! you are very dear to Vishnu who is the perceptor for all, and through Whom only one can attain moksha or release from bondage. I cut your leaf for the propitiation of purushottama. Oh Tulasi forgive me." Tulasi should not be plucked on Sundays, Fridays, New Year Days at any time, in the afternoons, nights, evening times and on Sankaraṇti days every month. New moon day, fullmoon day, dvādaśi are also days on which the plant should not be touched on any account. If secured, it must be considered tantamount to plucking God's head from the body. For use on these prohibited days, tulasi secured the previous day should be used.

When money or other substances are received for aradhana of God both the giver and receiver repeat" Achyutaḥ priyatām." For the worshipper of God, mercy to all livingbeings including man, keeping completely under control one's indriyas, mercy without himsa to all living creatures, patience, knowledge, contemplation and truthfulness are essential features to be possessed. These qualities are essential for every one who worships God and so a worshipper should do his best to increase the possessions of these characteristics by association with good acharyas, talking and associating with them and reading good sacred books during the "Upādānakala." Those who are not required to secure all these things during the time may spend their time by reading and listening to good things only. In case one has to do aradhana soon on special occasions, he may shorten the ceremonies abhigamanam and upādānam. Then he may do the satvikatyāgam and pray to God.