+++
title = "16 PANCHAMAHĀYAJÑAM"

+++

Immediately after Vaiśvadeva the person performs this ceremonial, Panchamahayajñam. He begins this ceremonial by doing "śrotrachamanam" and prāṇāyāmam in the usual way. Then he does sankalpam repeating "Śrībhagavadājñaya dēva yajñēna yakshye." Taking water he washes his left hand repeating "Vidyudasi" and then repeating "Aditēnu manyasva prasūva " does pariṣechanaṁ to agni (i.e., take round water) and puts in fire a samit or darbha. After this he takes the food from the part in the east which is marked off as the northern part, and repeating “Om dēvēbhyasvaha" puts in the fire, and then repeats " Devebhya idam na mama" and places in the fire a darbha. Then once again he pours water round the fire repeating during the process "Om aditēnu prāsāvih" and smears the hands repeating "Vrshtirasi." The meanings of the above Sanskrit passages are given here seriatim :--"This food is [[०९८]]
[[९३]]
offered to the devas. This offering belongs to the Devas and it is not mine or it does not belong to me. You are the cause of cutting." Again he does śrotrachamanam and wearing the yajñopavita with the left hand through it and the string on the right shoulder (i.e., prāchinviti) repeats "Śrībhagavadajñayā . . pitṛ yajñēna yakshye" doing sankalpam. He smears the hands repeating "Vidyudasi." The above Sanskrit when rendered into English run thus:-"I make the sacrifice by pitṛ yajña. You are the cause of separation". He pours water and smears the earth to the south of the fire pit and takes a small quantity of food from the cup again and repeating 'Om pitṛbhyassvadha" places his hand on the ground Then repeating "Pitṛbhya idam na mama" he pours water in the apradakshiṇa way round the fire and cleans his hands by wiping while repeating "Vṛṣṭirasi." The meaning of the Sanskrit in the above runs thus: "I offer this ball of rice to Pitṛs. This offering belongs to Pitṛs and it does not belong to me. You are the cause of cutting." Putting the yajñopavīta in the right way he does śrotrachamanam and prāṇāyāmam.

Then he does sankalpam repeating "Śrī bhagavadājñayā . . bhūta yajñēna yakshye." Repeating "Vidyudasi" (you are the cause of separation) he cleans his hands by smearing. He cleans the earth to the west of agra dana and takes from the cooked rice already used a small quantity of food and saying "Om bhūtebhyo balim harāmi" (I offer a ball of rice to all created beings) places it on the ground. Then he does pariśēchanam to it saying "Om bhūtebhya idam na mama" (this offering is for all created beings and it does not belong to me) and smears his hands repeating "Vṛṣṭirasi" (you are the cause of cutting).

Again he does śrotrachamanam and then prāṇāyāmam. Afterwards he does sankalpam repeating "Śrī bhagavadājñayā . . manuṣya yajñēna yakshye." Then saying "Vidyudasi" (you are the cause of separation) he takes from the central portion of the food some quantity of food (annam) and places it between agrādana and bhūtabali saying "Manuṣyēbhyohanta" and doing pariśēchanam. Then he cleans his hands by wiping and at the same time repeating "Vṛṣṭirasi".

Then he does śrotrachamanam and repeating "Om Śrī Viṣṇavē svāhā" puts in fire a darbha and then says "Om Śrī Viṣṇavē idam na mama." Then he gets up and repeats the mantra beginning "Agne naya" then does praṇāmam after repeating "Agnaye namaḥ param" and then abhivādanam. The balis offered to pitṛs and devas are placed aside and the remaining part is retained and in it put in the other balis. The food used in agra danana and manuṣya yajña is taken and mixed with that part used for atithis.

He does achamanam and repeating "Bhagavānēva . . . . . prātar Vaiśvadevākhyam karma . . . . . . kāritavān" the sātvika tyāga is done. Finally he repeats "Kṛtañcha . . Vāsudevaḥ" Then the sacred water of God is taken and he waits sometime (till the milking of a good cow) for atithis and then he sits for his meal.
