+++
title = "2"

+++


Source: [TW](https://archive.org/details/AgamaPramanyamSktEng/page/51/mode/1up)


[[51]]


62\. OBJECTION. However, the relation of cause and effect is not just known from the fact that one comes into existence upon the existence of the other, for that would mean over-extension. Nor does the realization that a birth ceremony is to be held follow invariably upon the knowledge of an agreeable meaning; for we find also that the same realization follows upon a feeling of distress, namely when the informed father is vexed by the trouble of maintaining his family.132

132: Then, one may suppose, the child would not so readily associate the birth ceremony with the previous {{com. mueniication|communication}}.  

REFUTATION. Don't we find that the realization of a {{karya|kārya}} is caused by a verbal statement, so that we can agree that, for example, the realization that a cow is to be fetched following a statement "Fetch the cow" is indeed caused by that statement? When you say that, since this realization cannot occur without a cause therefore the proximate statement must in that case be the cause of the realization, then I maintain that the same holds also in the case of "A son is born." It has been decided by our opponent that the verbal denotation of a meaning which causes an action to be taken is a result of the inclusion in the statement of a {{linadi|liṅādi}} suffix.133 He who maintains that all words only bear meaningfully on {{karya|kārya}}, maintains in effect that {{padarthas|padārthas}}134 exist only in {{karya|kārya}} statements and that e.g. in the case of cows, horses and the like, which are related to bodies, their being a {{padartha|padārtha}} is ascertained by the inclusion or exclusion of the words denoting them in a statement concerning {{karya|kārya}}. If he says, indeed, whenever their being a {{padartha|padārtha}} is significantly construed, it is construed just as connected with {{karya|kārya}}, we reply, Stop being obstinate; for verbal exchange is also possible through denotation of words that are connected with other things than {{karyas|kāryas}}.135

133: supra §36\.  
134: The things-meant or denoted by the word,  
135: {{Yamuna's|Yāmuna's}} argument is that the injunctive, etc. terminations of the verb denote the injunction as their thing-meant ({{padartha|padārtha}}); but what makes this injunction 'meaningful' is not that it is an injunction, but that it is connected with someone who is qualified to accept the injunction, e.g., in the injunction {{soargakāmo jajeta|svargakāmo yajeta}}. The injunctive {{yajua|yajña}} has no meaning or purpose unless there is a "desire for heaven;" the meaning of the injunction thus is connected with the consequence of this desire of heaven, namely, that somebody who has this desire is prepared to do something about it.  

[[52]] {{AOAMA FRAMANYAM|ĀGAMA PRĀMĀṆYAM}}

· 63\. It is necessary to accept the position that words are denotative of connected meanings, for otherwise it would be impossible to explain that they are denotative of meanings connected with {{karyas|kāryas}}. The definition 'the thing meant by a word is always connected with a {{karya|kārya}}' fails to cover the defined topic completely; for it does not apply in the case of injunctive suffixes, since these suffixes denote their own meanings as connected, not with {{karya|kārya}}, but with consequences of already established facts, such as proper qualification on the part of the person {{en joined|enjoined}} etc. Or if it is said that in their case there is denotation of connected meanings and in the other case denotation of meanings connected with {{karya|kārya}}, we reply that this is a neither old nor young, argument;136 it is more appropriate simply to accept the view that there is denotation of connected meanings in general.

136: {{ardhajarati|ardhajaratī}} is a half-old woman; the {{ardhajaraliyanyāya|ardhajaratīyanyāya}} is used to indicate that the opponent wants to have it both ways and that consequently his argument, like a half-old and half-young woman, is useless either way.  

64\. Therefore, the adherents of all schools should accept that words have proper denotation for the meanings they denote because these meanings are connected with other meanings that are required to complete the sense of the statement, are closely collocated and are appropriate. Even if the denoting power of language were to be understood only through its proper signification in {{karya|kārya}} statements alone,137 even so it is correct when we decide the denotation of language to take the standpoint that {{kārpa|kārya}} is just one of the inessential factors of denotation, like the identity of the speaker, the extent of space in which a statement can be heard etc. The logicians hold the view that the meaning of a language statement cannot be known except by language statement.138 Consequently, there exists no inherent relationship with {{karya|kārya}} as cause of denotation in uses of words that have their proper signification, just as is the case with floating precious stones on water. Just as this floating, however helpful it may be to determine the identity of certain diamonds, e.g. the {{brahmin|brāhmaṇa}} diamond, serves no purpose when a stone is being transacted which has already been properly identified, similarly the {{karya|kārya}}, however helpful to understand the proper signification of a word, serves no purpose once its proper signification has been identified.

137: {{Misra's|Miśra's}} text here has pady api prartly anu papattisamadhigamaniyaiva {{Sabdaŝaktis|śabdaśaktis}} "the denoting power of language is to be known only through the impossibility of operation," which makes no sense. The reading must be corrupt, in anu papatti we may find a corruption of {{yulpatti|vyutpatti}}, in {{pracrtti|pravṛtti}} perhaps a corruption of kāryārthe or kāryārtha-. I read conjecturally {{karyar the vyutpatti.|kāryārthe vyutpatti-}}samadhigamanīyaiva, which gives the required sense.  
138: This holds for those statements which are not verifiable by other means of knowledge, for if they are verifiable, they are no {{incans|means}} of knowledge in their own right.  

[[53]]

65\. Moreover, if words denote their meanings only as connected with {{karya|kārya}}, then how can we know from them that, for example, there is a relation between a fruit and a river-bank, as in a statement : "There is a fruit on the river-bank?" If you say that a statement of such a substantive relation does not denote the relation it states through its primary sense, but through secondary sense, then, we may ask, where do statements then have their primary sense? If you answer in a {{karya|kārya}} which is not previously known through other means of knowledge, we reply: no, for then no use of words would be possible, since their meaning would not yet have been identified. Naturally there can be no knowledge of the meaning of a word when that word {{dea|denotes}} a meaning not previously known through other means of knowledge, and no cognition can arise from words with unknown meanings, for that would entail over-extension.

[[54]]

66\. OBJECTION. My position is this. In ordinary language a statement is understood to have its proper signification when it bears on a {{karya|kārya}} that is to be accomplished with a certain action. In Vedic language a statement enjoys a special power of denotation which transcends the transitory root-sense of the word "sacrificing ", and it has this power of denotation because it is the means of realizing a certain fruit and acquires this power on account of the collocation of words describing this fruit; whereas in ordinary language, since there verbal exchange is possible also to the unsophisticated, this determination of the nature of word and meaning is not attended to.139

139: read na hi {{kriyakārye vyut pannaḥ sthāji karyam|kriyākārye vyutpannaḥ sthāyi kāryam}}.  

REFUTATION. This position is just wishful thinking; for a language statement, even if understood in your way as bearing meaningfully only on a kārya to be accomplished with an action, does not by that token set forth a permanent {{karya|kārya}},140 since that would mean over-extension. If we cannot know the true connection of words even when the usage of our elders, through which the denotations of these words is understood, takes place in accordance with these words, then we can never know their connection! If a language statement has lost its postulated true denoting power because it is impossible, it does not thereby acquire another denoting power. In such cases we surely must assume {{lakṣaṇa|lakṣaṇā}}. For when certain words are collocated that have incompatible meanings, these words do not therefore denote something else altogether, for then all word meanings would become unreliable.

140: {{athayi|asthāyi}}; the {{Prabhakara|Prābhākara}} view is that the {{karya|kārya}} has a lasting efficacy beyond the inevitably transient action it involves; for the {{karya|kārya}} must remain in order to effect the fruit of the action at any time after the completion of the action. {{Yamuna|Yāmuna}} objects that we cannot have two altogether different denoting powers in {{langauge|language}}, one to convey a transitory thing, another to convey a non-transitory thing. The only possible explanation is that of {{laktand|lakṣaṇā}} "figurative usage," which remains related to the {{mukhjā|mukhyā}} "principal usage." But he will deny the entire construction (67).  

67\. Besides, we do not admit that the fact that a word has the power to communicate a {{karya|kārya}} that is not previously known through other means of knowledge proves that there actually exists a relationship between itself and the fruit of the action it enjoins. The only relation proved of it is that with injunction, not with instrumentality. That in a statement there subsists a relation with a {{karya|kārya}} which transcends the root-sense of the verb cannot be proved except by the relation of {{karya|kārya}} with the fruit of the act, and the latter relation cannot be proved without the former. And therefore there is a vicious interdependence that cannot be refuted. If there is no factor which activates the person who, according to the injunction, is specified by the heaven that is to be achieved, the injunction itself cannot be the means of achieving the desired heaven. The root-sense of the words being transitory, the statement itself cannot function as this means.141 Therefore the assertion that a language statement communicates as its proper meaning a {{karya|kārya}} which exceeds this transitory root-sense, cannot be correct. A person is not specified {{hy|by}} heaven as the object to be achieved,142 but it is the person who desires heaven who is enjoined upon to accomplish the act. Heaven can not be the specification of the person's qualification, because heaven is yet to be achieved. Only something that has already been achieved, that actually exists, can specify the person upon whom an act is enjoined, for instance, the real fact of his being alive etc. Consequently only his desire can specify his qualification for the act.

141: This is the {{Pribhikara|Prābhākara}} view, which holds that in the injunction {{nijaga seargakāmo yajeta|niyoga svargakāmo yajeta}} the {{sadhya|sādhya}} (object to be realized) is not {{sparge|svarga}}, but the entire niyoga (cf. {{Prakarapapañcika|Prakaraṇapañcikā}}, p. 190), so that the statement of the injunction would become the means ({{sadhana|sādhana}}) to realize that {{sadhya|sādhya}}, sc. the injunction.  
142: {{Cr.|Cf.}} {{Prakaraṇapañcikā}} p. 182\.  

[[55]]

68\. Furthermore, precisely how is heaven, which in your opinion functions as the specification of the person enjoined, an object to be realized, a {{sadhya|sādhya}}?

[[56]]

If its being a {{sadhya|sādhya}} means that it is fit for a relation with a {{sadhana|sādhana}}, it is impossible for heaven to be siddha, as long as its relatability obtains, since it cannot become siddha in the meantime.143 The only authority that exists for heaven becoming siddha in the end is the injunction itself, while the only authority for the injunction is just this that heaven does become siddha. This is plainly a vicious circle. If heaven is the {{sadlya|sādhya}}, the injunction is not the {{sadhya|sādhya}}. It is not possible to combine two {{sadhyas|sādhyas}} in one sentence.144

143: Nothing can become a fact (siddha) as long as it is still to be made a fact ({{sadhya|sādhya}}) by a "factualizing" means ({{sadhana|sādhana}}); thus as long as it is related with such a means it cannot be a fact.  
144: This is the principle of {{ekarakyata|ekavākyatā}}: a statement can contain only one injunction, otherwise there is {{aakyabheda|vākyabheda}}: what should be one sentence is split up into two.  

69\. OBJECTION. Indeed, the unity of a sentence is broken up when it contains two {{sadhyas|sādhyas}} that are independent, but not when the two are interdependent. And here the two {{sadhyas|sādhyas}} are interdependent since the realization of heaven is contained in the realization of the injunction. That is what the Author says: "When the niyoga is realized, everything else in accordance with it is also realized;" and: "Why should the realization of the fruit not be held to be subservient to the realization of the injunction?"145 Therefore there is no conflict here.

145: Quotations not identified; but for the argument, see {{Prakarapapañcikā|Prakaraṇapañcikā}}, p 183 f.  

REFUTATION. No; unless heaven is realized, how can the injunction be realized? Without the realization of heaven neither the qualification, nor the object, nor anything else required by the injunction is realized.

70\. OBJECTION. In the case of the qualifications for periodical rites the injunction does not require the 'realization of any fruit.'146 Nor does an injunction to one act fail to apply to a person who really desires another fruit. The pre-eminence147 is really the injunction's; a person is enjoined upon by the {{injunc tion|injunction}} to any act in the same way as he is enjoined upon to perform the periodical acts. For the injunction draws unto itself the desirous person who himself thinks that the heaven which he desires is the principal object, in the same way as the injunction to perform the periodical acts activates a person, even though he does not desire anything, to these acts which bear no fruit at all. Besides, a person who is desirous of heaven also opens and shuts his eyes; for you these actions do not subserve his realization of heaven. Why not consider the sacrificing an action of the same kind? There are some who do not accept that it is a means of realizing heaven.

146: No specific fruits are attached to nitya rites.  
147: {{mahatmya|māhātmya}}, which corresponds to {{pradhanya|prādhānya}}, {{pradhānatā}}.  

[[57]]

71\. REFUTATION. If that is the view, we ask: Are the sacrifice etc., which are to be grasped by the cognition that they are such means, eliminated from the injunction? On this point: When the injunction does not mean to convey a relation between the object to be realized and the means of realizing it, then all acts are fruitless. Therefore, it is sound to maintain that from the injunctive suffixes there results first the cognition that they are indeed the means to realize the desired object, and that subsequently the desire for this object prompts a person to undertake the act of realization. But it is improper to maintain that the primary denotation occurs in the expressing of a meaning that was previously unknown, and that the denotation in the expressing of any other meaning is secondary. We conclude that ordinary, non-Vedic statements give rise to cognitions concerning meanings that are just so established by these statements.

[[58]]

72\. OBJECTION. But these cognitions do not arise from the denoting power of language, but result from Inference. For these statements, though their denotations in conveying certain meanings are consciously known once their proper meanings have been learnt, do not furnish complete certainty about their meanings merely upon being heard by a listener, when they are accompanied by doubt which is created by the listener's observation that in one case or other statements have deviated from their proper meanings.148 And, unless there be complete certainty, the meaning will remain unknown; for no knowledge can arise in one's mind from uncertainty. If the meaning of a statement is not known, the listener wants to discover it: "The speaker uses words whose meanings apparently admit of being connected; and reliable persons do not use words whose connections are unknown;" and the listener realizes that therefore the speaker has knowledge of such a connection. If the knowledge of connection is thus inferred, the meaning discovered by the listener does not require the authority of verbal testimony. Consequently, since ordinary language statements are dependent on the speaker's cognition; they terminate in that cognition through Inference alone.

148: {{BA Up.|BĀ Up.}} 5\.6\.1\.  

73\. REFUTATION. This view is not correct; for a word conveys its right meaning as its natural function, and the observation that in one case the statement happened to be untrue under the influence of defects in the speaker's character should not give rise to a general suspicion which would cause all statement to give up its natural capacity of conveying its meaning.149 The suspicion that a fire may not burn in other cases because in one case, when obstructed by mantras, it fails to burn, does not make fire fail to burn! And the fact that the sense of vision may give rise to a cognition which does not correspond to reality-e.g. that nacre is silver-as the result of some optical error does not signify that the visual sense cannot produce true cognition of the visible presence of a pitcher etc. Therefore, a statement does indeed instantly convey a certain meaning to the listener if he knows the relation between the words and their meanings. It does not require knowledge of the basis. Before there is complete knowledge on the part of the listener about the basic knowledge of the speaker, and, further, when the meaning has been expressed, the question rises: "How does he know this?" and Inference proceeds to resolve that question. You want to infer: "Did the speaker know something?" or wish to infer his knowledge of the connection of the different meanings. But the mere knowledge that the speaker knew something is not enough for utterance and action concerning a statement-meaning to proceed. Inference of a cognition concerning the connection of different meanings is impossible without a prior cognition of such a connection. This being so, the meaning of the statement must be known first. For cognitions whose particular objects are not connected, are not connected themselves. Nor is a particular meaning established by cognitions that are inferred to be such. If {{yousay|you say}} that any word combination which is able to convey a certain connection produces knowledge of just this connection, I maintain that the connection of the particular meanings must be known previously; unless a connection has already reached the level of cognition it cannot give rise to being expressed in a statement.

149: Not to be found in the major {{Upanisads|Upaniṣads}}.  
[[59]]

74\. To conclude, the cognition of an established fact in statements like "there is a fruit on the riverbank" is strictly of verbal origin and does not arise from Inference. Therefore the position that statements produce valid knowledge only if they deal with a previously unknown {{karya|kārya}} is taken only by people whose judgments are'stultified by their continuous preoccupation with their own theories. In the manner set forth above it is true that statements may bear meaningfully and informatively on other meanings as well. Consequently, all the statements of the {{Upanisads|Upaniṣads}} which set forth the existence of a categorically different Person (e.g. "He is the overlord of the Universe, sovereign of all. He commands all the world,"150 "All this is manifest to Him" etc.) are authoritative as to what they state, since they produce indubitable and unreversed knowledge of their contents.

150: supra §35\.  

[[60]]

75\. Nor do statements concerning established facts lose their authority simply because of the consideration that repetition or reversion might be anticipated on the strength of our assumption that either a corroborating or an invalidating cognition about the same facts could conceivably occur; for the same thing would also apply to statements concerning {{tarya|kārya}}.151 Besides, a {{karya|kārya}} can also be known through other means of knowledge, e.g. the {{karya|kārya}} that firewood is to be fetched; for it has been admitted that that {{karya|kārya}} can also be known through another means of knowledge as in the case of the cooking of the odana.152 Or if a statement which sets forth a {{karya|kārya}} about a categorically different act like the agnihotra is held to be authoritative because no other authority for it can be conceived to exist,-why, since there is not a ghost of other authority for the existence of the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}} whose personality consists in unsurpassed knowledge, sovereignty and beatitude, it is all the same, depending on what partisan view one takes! Moreover, if a cognition concerning a content that is also known through another means of knowledge does not recognize its own content as authoritative, since it has already been taken care of by another authority, this {{non-authoritativenes|non-authoritativeness}} of its content is beyond experience for it is a mere matter of assumption. Therefore it must be maintained that all indubitable and unreversed knowledge is authoritative, regardless of whether its content is established, or yet to be performed, or anything else. Hence we reject our opponent's position.

151: supra §42\.  
152: read ity asal for {{iliyat|itiyat}}.  

[[61]]

76\. The objections that omniscience is acquired by means of the regular senses is incorrect, because śruti contradicts it: "He sees without eyes, hears with{{out}} ears; he who does not see with the eye, who sees the eyes, has neither effect nor instrument;"153 "knowledge, strength and action are natural to Him,"154 etc. These śrutis do not speak metaphorically, for there is no authority for this assumption. Metaphorical usage is assumed when the primary meanings of the śrutis make no sense. Since the primary meaning here makes sense, the assumption of metaphorical use is baseless.

153: {{Svet Up.|Śvet Up.}} 3\.19\.  
154: {{Svet Up.|Śvet Up.}} 6\.8\.  
155: cf supra note.  

[[62]]

77\. OBJECTION. But in this case we have in fact reason to cancel the {{primay|primary}} meaning, because the primary sense militates against other means of knowledge. REFUTATION. What other means of knowledge? Not, to start, Perception, for we see no Perception occur which shows that the said Person is non-existent. If you retort that non-existence is decided by the nonapprehension of what should be there, we reply that this does not hold in our case since the object, that is the said Person, is actually apprehended through Scripture itself, which is the highest-ranking among the assembly of the means of knowledge. Nor does it militate against Inference; for how could an Inference which disproves that Person arise at all, slow-moving as it is, when its object is instantly refuted by the rapidly arising scriptural cognition? Moreover, if this were so, the relation of sacrificing etc. to heaven, {{apúrva|apūrva}}155 etc., would logically be contradicted by the fact that sacrificing etc. are actions, when Scripture did not cancel such reasoning. True, the identity of sacrificial pole and sun, which is asserted by Scripture, is cancelled by another means of knowledge, namely Perception alone, because the difference between a piece of wood and the disc of the sun is indeed obvious. Besides, in this case it is legitimate to assume metaphorical usage, for the statement of this identity is an {{arthavada|arthavāda}},156 since it forms one single statement with the proximate injunction about the unction of the sacrificial pole. There is no other injunction to which it could be accessory as an {{arthatada|arthavāda}}.157 Alternatively, inasmuch as the human importance of a statement would be lost if there were no injunction to connect it with, an injunction may be supplemented and then the {{arthavada|arthavāda}} is regarded as accessory to that supplemented injunction.

156: supra note 86\.  
157: supra § 36\.  

[[63]]

78\. The objection158 that as long as statements fail to prompt the operator of the means of knowledge to being active or to prevent him from being active, they do not communicate self-sufficient information, does not hold good. For, we find that statements have human importance also outside any connection with an injunction; in such a case it will be as in the statement “A son has been born to you," and the like. Nor need an injunction be supplemented in these cases. For without an injunction, too, joy arises from the information that a son has been born. Likewise, a statement which is self-sufficient in merely expressing particular actions which questioners want to know in exchanges of question and answer-e.g. "Which action?" "Cooking!"-do not require the supplementation of an injunction. In the upaniṣadic texts the knowledge of brahman is declared to be rewarded by great bliss: "the brahman-knower becomes brahman";159 "the {{brahman knower|brahman-knower}} attains the supreme";160 "the {{saman|sāman}} cantor attains with brahman all that he desires:"161 the human importance of statements without injunctions is quite clear from these and other scriptural words. To sum up, when it is established that the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}} is the treasury solely of beautiful qualities of direct universal cognition, compassionateness etc., qualities which are true and natural to Him, and which we know from hundreds of quoted śrutis, then it is also established that the Tantra which is based on His universal cognition is authoritative indeed.

158: This must refer to the śruti sa yo ha {{voi tat param veda น brahma veda brahma bhavati|vai tat paraṃ veda brahma veda brahmaiva bhavati}} (quoted {{Ramanuja|Rāmānuja}}, {{Vedārthasarngraha|Vedārthasaṃgraha}}, 91), which I have been unable to locate.  
159: Taitt Up. 2\.1\.1\. {{brahmatid|brahmavid}} āpnoti param.  
160: This must refer to Taitt Up. 2\.1\.1 {{so'fnute sarpan kāmān saha brahmaṇā vipaściṭā|so'śnute sarvān kāmān saha brahmaṇā vipaścitā}}, but sa {{samagaḥ|sāmagāḥ}} is obscure, unless one may regard it as a corruption of {{vipafcitā|vipaścitā}}.  

[[64]]

79\. OBJECTION. Granted that, as you have described it, there exists some Person who is endowed with natural omniscience, as it is known from the upaniṣads, yet, unless it is absolutely certain that this Person is indeed Hari, Pañcaratra will not be authoritative. REFUTATION. This is a worthless remark; no experts in the Veda dispute that the Supreme Soul, cause of the entire universe, is Vāsudeva. For He is revealed in the upaniṣads as the Supreme Soul: "Truth, knowledge, infinite; that is the supreme step of Viṣṇu. Vāsudeva is the ultimate matter, the ultimate spirit".161 He was alone beyond who became this world;162 "higher than whom there is nothing at all". In accordance with the subject expressed in these statements there are passages like: "From whom these beings..." "Sat alone, my son..." "Therefore Viṣṇu's perfect knowledge is established by the upaniṣads. And it is not declared in śruti that the origination, subsistence and destruction of the world are caused by anyone but Him. Hence there is a consensus that He is the supreme omniscient soul. That He is the Supreme Soul we learn also from the statements of {{Dvaipayana|Dvaipāyana}}, Parāśara, {{Narada|Nārada}} and other great seers. Thus "Know {{theu|thou}}, O tormentor of thy foes, that the entire world rests on {{Visnu|Viṣṇu}}. The Great Viṣṇu creates the totality of creatures, moving and unmoving. In him they go to their reabsorption, from Him they originate," "The glorious Sage Nārāyaṇa, without beginning or end, is the sovereign Lord. He creates the creatures, those that stand still and those that move."163 That He is the Supreme Brahman is also learnt elsewhere. "Kesava, O best of the {{Bharatas|Bhāratas}}, the Blessed One, is the sovereign, the supreme soul, the entire universe: thus it stands revealed in many places of the Scripture."164 For those who seek to know the supreme principle by means of many-sided reasonings Hari alone is the Principle, the great Yogin, Nārāyaṇa the Lord.165 Likewise in the {{Danadharma|Dānadharma}}, "{{Padmanabha|Padmanābha}} is the Supreme Soul, the highest One, the pure One, the Refuge. This is the secret doctrine of the Veda; dost thou not know, sacker of cities? By His grace do we all cause the worlds to exist. And the trusted ones, and the first among the immortals, and the gods are held to be His representatives, If {{Visnu|Viṣṇu}} is indifferent, no good will come to us." Thus Rudra's word.166 Similarly, in the {{Mahabharata|Mahābhārata}} and {{Matsya Purana|Matsya Purāṇa}}, "He who amongst them is the Supreme Soul, He indeed is the eternal, unqualified, perfect One; He is to be known as Nārāyaṇa, for He is the world-soul, the Spirit." Likewise in the {{Varaha Purana|Varāha Purāṇa}}, "Who, excepting the Lord {{Narayana|Nārāyaṇa}}, is superior to the God whose conduct has become the life-order on the earth?" "There has been no God greater than Nārāyaṇa, nor shall there be; this is the secret doctrine of the Vedas and the {{Purāņas|Purāṇas}}, O excellent ones."

161: Partial quotations from Taitt Up. 2\.1\.1, {{Mund Up.|Muṇḍ Up.}} and an unidentified source.  
162: {{Nrsimhapurvatapani Up.|Nṛsiṃhapūrvatāpanī Up.}} 2\.4 (which reads {{purastad|purastāt}} for {{parastad|parastāt}}) and {{Svet Up.|Śvet Up.}} 3\.9\.  
163: not identified.  
164: not identified.  
165: Could this refer to {{Varaha Purana|Varāha Purāṇa}}? Cf. infra.  
166: {{Visnu Pur.|Viṣṇu Pur.}}, 1\.1\.31\.  

[[65]]
[[66]]

Likewise in the {{Linga Purana|Liṅga Purāṇa}}, "{{Janardana|Janārdana}} is the sole Spirit, the highest One, the Supreme Soul, from whom {{Brahma|Brahmā}} was born; from Him Rudra and from Him all the world." Likewise {{Paragara's|Parāśara's}} word,' The world has originated from {{Visņu|Viṣṇu}} 'and' on Him it rests. He is the maker of its subsistence and its destruction."167 Likewise in the {{Manavadharmaśāstra|Mānavadharmaśāstra}},168 "Nārāyaṇa is higher than the unmanifest; the World-Egg originates from the unmanifest. Within the Egg are all these worlds as well as the earth with her seven continents." Therefore, the study of these and similar śrutis, {{smrtis|smṛtis}}, epical texts and {{purāņas|purāṇas}} proves that Vāsudeva is the universal cause, the Supreme Soul.

167: Not in {{Manusmrti|Manusmṛti}}.  
168: A little known Vedic branch (if it was a Vedic tradition), from which certain {{Vaisnava|Vaiṣṇava}} sects derive their authority; cf. infra §138\.  

80\. Nor do the śrutis declare that Rudra is the Supreme Soul, or that any other deity is. On the contrary, the followers of the {{Ekayana śākhā|Ekāyana śākhā}}169 say that he has an origin, and the same is found in the Veda itself: "Darkness was here.... from which Rudra is born; that is the greatest in all the worlds, that indeed is the oldest in the worlds." Similarly, Rudra's position is clearly known to be a result of his karman: "He obtained his greatness by propitiating {{Visnu|Viṣṇu}}." "From the forehead sprang a drop; from that Rudra was born,"170 These and other śrutis declare that Rudra was born. This being so, the statements that in appearance convey the greatness of Rudra and others really serve as laudatory statements, like the śruti: "the car is brahman."

169: These quotations could not be identified.  
170: {{BA Up|BĀ Up}} 4\.1\.5\.  

[[67]]

Consequently, the passages in the {{Puranas|Purāṇas}} which declare Rudra etc. to be the Supreme Soul have not their primary meaning, because they are in conflict with Perception and Scripture.

81\. Concerning the objection that the assertions of the doctrines of the Tantras are to be rejected since their greatness is set forth only in non-Vedic Tantric texts, we say that {{Visnu|Viṣṇu}} is stated to be the Supreme One in the texts of the Way of the Vedic doctrine. For example in the {{Viṣņu Purāṇa|Viṣṇu Purāṇa}}, "The Supreme Soul, the Basis of all creatures, the Supreme Lord is called by the name of {{Visnu|Viṣṇu}} in Vedas and {{Upanisads|Upaniṣads}}."171 In the {{Varaha Purana|Varāha Purāṇa}}, "The Supreme Brahman is {{Visnu|Viṣṇu}}; the triple division in the pathways of the Vedic doctrine is here set forth; the ignorant do not know this."172 "There has been no god greater than Nārāyaṇa, nor shall there be; this is the secret doctrine of Vedas and {{Puranas|Purāṇas}}, O excellent ones."173 Likewise in the {{Matsya Purana|Matsya Purāṇa}}, "In those aeons where sattva prevails, the greatness of {{Visnu|Viṣṇu}} is declared. In aeons predominated by tamas the greatness of Fire and {{Siva|Śiva}} is expounded."174 Likewise in the {{Linga Purana|Liṅga Purāṇa}}, "For there is no other recourse ordained but {{Vişnu|Viṣṇu}}; this the Vedas constantly declare, no doubt about it."175 Likewise in the {{Vayu Purana|Vāyu Purāṇa}},

171: {{Visnu Pur.|Viṣṇu Pur.}} 6\.4\.40\.  
172: cf. {{Varaha Pur.|Varāha Pur.}}, 72\.4, which reads {{padrate|pūjyate}} in b.  
173: cf. {{Varaha Pur.|Varāha Pur.}} {{7026|70\.26}} na tasmāt parato devo bhavitā na {{bhavisyati|bhaviṣyati}}. It is clear from several quotations from this {{Purana|Purāṇa}} that {{Yamuna's|Yāmuna's}} text had different readings, not all of them better.  
174: Matsya Pur. 290\.15\.  
175: The {{Linga|Liṅga}}, {{Vayu|Vāyu}} and {{Bhavisyat|Bhaviṣyat}} quotations could not be verified.  

[[68]]

"The Spirit that belongs to the Way of the Veda is {{explaind|explained}} to be the thousand-armed supreme lord of creatures." Likewise in the {{Bhavisyat Purana|Bhaviṣyat Purāṇa}}, "Visnu is traditionally known to be the {{Sepreme|Supreme}} in the pathways of the Vedic doctrine. {{Visnu|Viṣṇu}} is the greatest among persons, the most exalted Supreme Person." All this has already been explained in great detail in the {{Purusanirnaya|Puruṣanirṇaya}}176 and is therefore not further enlarged upon here. Therefore, how can our tongue endeavour to say that the Tantra which is revealed by {{Visanu|Viṣṇu}} who is known from the {{Upanisads|Upaniṣads}} is false? For He is such that He has an immediate insight into the dharma of Consecration, Propitiation etc., by virtue of the omniscience that is natural to Him.177

176: Title of one of {{Yamuna's|Yāmuna's}} treatises.  
177: read sa hi saha{{jasamnedanasākṣālkṛtadikṣārādhonödidharmah|jasaṃvedanasākṣātkṛtadīkṣārādhanādidharmaḥ}}  

## ...

Also in the {{Santiparavan|Śāntiparvan}}: "Certainly, the {{Vaisnava|Vaiṣṇava}} must undergo Consecration with all effort: for Hari will be particularly graceful to one who has been consecrated and to no one else.204 One should consecrate a Brahmin in spring, a {{Ksatriya|Kṣatriya}} in summer, a {{Vaisya|Vaiśya}} in the autumn, a {{Sudra|Śūdra}} in winter, a woman in the rainy season according to the {{Pañcarātra|Pāñcarātra}} doctrine."205 And likewise: "It has been made commensurate with the four Vedas on the great Mountain Meru."206 Now, how could {{Dvaipayana|Dvaipāyana}} reject the Pañcaratra, which is his own supreme doctrine, comprising the sense of the {{Upanisads|Upaniṣads}}, as follows from these and a hundred direct and circumlocutory declarations made with full respect?

204: Mahabharata not identified.  
205: Mahabharata not identified.  
206: Mahabharata not identified.  

[[80]]

95\. {{ODJECTION|OBJECTION}}. But then how to explain the {{sutra|sūtra}} {{ulballyasaṇibhavā!?|utpattyasaṃbhavāt!?}}207
REPLY. What is the intention of the sūtra?
OBJECTION. The following: Since it is expounded in the {{Bhagavata Sastra|Bhāgavata Śāstra}} that the individual soul has an origin, and since this is impossible as it militates against Scripture and Logic, therefore this {{gastra|śāstra}} is erroneous. REPLY. If that is the meaning of the {{sutra|sūtra}}, then how can the {{sutra|sūtra}} be intended to reject the {{Pancarātra Sastra|Pāñcarātra Śāstra}}? For the {{Pancarātra Sastras|Pāñcarātra Śāstras}} do not accept that the individual soul has an origin, which assumption would have justified the {{sutra's|sūtra's}} rejection. OBJECTION. But is it not their assertion that Vāsudeva is at once the supreme material cause and the supreme spirit; that from him the individual soul {{Sankarṣana|Saṅkarṣaṇa}} is born, from {{Samkarṣaṇa|Saṅkarṣaṇa}} the mind called Pradyumna, and from the latter the ego called Aniruddha?
REPLY. NO. The personal manifestation of God is described as being constituted by {{vyuhar|vyūhas}},208 and the word individual soul" is assigned to one of these {{oyihas|vyūhas}} for practical purposes, in order to prove clearly the differences that exist within the Adorable One, which differences are in accordance with those of the varṇas. It is as they say: "The four {{vyhas|vyūhas}} are to be worshipped successively by the four varṇas successively." Besides, the words 'individual soul,' 'mind' and 'ego' do not denote these {{tanmatraso|tanmātras}}209 themselves, but refer to a person who is the superintending deity of these orders and whose personality is entirely different from the order he superintends. Birth is described as the acquisition of various bodies, as is said in the statement {{toyena jioan|toyena jīvān}} in the {{Yajurmurdhan|Yajurmūrdhan}}.210 Besides, the Author of the {{Sutras|Sūtras}} has already discarded the śruti, smṛti and profane views concerning the origination and reabsorption of the individual soul in the {{sutra|sūtra}} {{caracara paparayas tu syat tadayapadefo bhāktas tadbhacabḥācitrāt|carācaravyapāśrayas tu syāt tadvyapadeśo bhāktas tadbhāvabhāvitvāt}}.211 And since, moreover, the origination of the individual soul out of Brahman has been rejected in the sūtras {{nātmā śrutch nityatvāc ca tabhpal|nātmā śruter nityatvāc ca tābhyaḥ}},212 it does not occasion a renewed exposition: an issue which does not need being made a topic would then be made a topic.

207: {{BrS|BṛS}}, 2\.2\.42\.  
208: 'Divisions' of the Supreme God as Vāsudeva, {{Sankarṣapa|Saṅkarṣaṇa}}, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.  
209: {{tanmatras|tanmātras}} here in the sense of the "higher evolutes."  
210: {{toyena jivān visasarja bhūmyām|toyena jīvān vyasarjayad bhūmyām}}, MahānārUp., 1\.4\.  
211: {{BrS.|BṛS.}} 2\.3\.16 (17). Translation: "A word descriptive of moving or unmoving beings, has not a secondary meaning [in referring to Brahman], because such a being's existence depends on Brahman's existence."  
212: {{BrS.|BṛS.}}, 2\.3\.17 (18). Translation: "The {{atman|ātman}} is not born because there is no śruti to that effect, and because of its eternality, which is proved by the śrutis."  

[[81]]

96\. This also explains the sūtra na ca {{kartuḥ karanam|kartuḥ karaṇam}};213 for it is not said here that the instrument, Sc. the mind, originates from the agent, sc. {{Samkarsana|Saṅkarṣaṇa}}. For we have already stated that these names solely refer to the persons who {{superintendent|superintend}} these orders but are themselves different from them, OBJECTION. Then why this {{sutra|sūtra}} at all? For we do not find that instruments, like a hatchet, originate from an agent, like Devadatta, so that an instrument out of an agent makes no sense. REFUTATION. Well, then you reject the general view that all instruments, vital airs, mind etc. have their origin in Brahman which itself is without the entire collection of all instruments and rests solely on its own power; this view is stated in the text: "From it springs the vital air, the mind and all the senses."214 Or if you do agree on this because it is clearly proved in Revelation, I ask you why you don't agree on it because it is clearly proved in Pañcaratra. It is not a very proper procedure to deny things that are proved by smṛti; since both śruti and smṛti spring from perfect knowledge, they are equally valid.

213: {{BrS|BṛS}}, 2\.2\.43\.  
214: {{Mund Up.|Muṇḍ Up.}}, 2\.1\.3\.  

[[82]]

97\. OBJECTION. The {{sutra|sūtra}} {{vijanadibhāve vā tadapratisedhal|vijñānādibhāve vā tadapratiṣedhaḥ}}215 is explained as follows: The Author raises the question which one of two alternatives may be true: Are these four equally and independently sovereign, or has one a quaternity of personalities which he has assumed at his own desire? and then he points out the defect: if they are equally sovereign, none of them can be effects because they are equal; when they are different forms of one, what is the purpose of this division? REFUTATION. That is not correct, because an alternative is impossible. For no one who holds that there is a God theorizes that the world has several Gods, least of all the {{Pañcaratrikas|Pāñcarātrikas}} who hold that "Vāsudeva is the ultimate material cause". But this one {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}}, who has divided Himself into four for reasons of sport, protects the entire world. And this position is not unjustified, because it is justified in the same manner as the appearance of second-born and first-born brothers like Bala and Bharata. For just as the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}}, who has created the variety of phenomena of ether, 'Wind, {{Siva|Śiva}}, {{Brahma|Brahmā}} etc. for His sport, whose sole motivation is the sport of his unfathomable power, has voluntarily assumed the personalities of {{Rama|Rāma}}, {{Laksmana|Lakṣmaṇa}}, Bharata, {{Satrughna|Śatrughna}} etc., without there being the possibility of logical conflict in the same manner the divisions of {{Samkarṣaṇa|Saṅkarṣaṇa}}, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, too, are unconflicting.

215: {{BrS|BṛS}}., 2\.2\.44\.  

[[83]]

98\. Furthermore, {{vipratiṣedhat|vipratiṣedhāt}}216 may mean "because of conflict with Revelation", on the basis of the citation "failing to find in the four Vedas..." or "because of mutual conflict between the {{Tanti as|Tantras}} themselves". The former alternative, incompatibility with Revelation has already been refuted as being without valid basis. Mutual conflict between the {{Pañcarātra|Pāñcarātra}} Tantras themselves, whose terminological precision has been perfected by the rules of logic governing principal matter, generality, peculiarity, quality and the like, does not exist. On the other hand, statements that lack the corroboration of logic can have no cogency; as the maxim says: "A statement must have precision perfected by logic before it can communicate its meaning." Consequently, the Author of the {{Sutras|Sūtras}} gives the lie to those exegetes who, {{hy|by}} superimposing on the {{Pañcarātra|Pāñcarātra}} Tantras (whose validity he strongly affirms as no less than that of the Vedas, in such assertions as "{{idam mahopanisadam|idaṃ mahopaniṣadam}}," etc.) the non-existent doctrine of the soul's origination, explain that the sūtra means to reject the Pañcaratra Tantras. Enough.

216: {{BrS|BṛS}}., 2\.2\.45\.  

99\. The meaning of the {{sutras|sūtras}} is this. First the Author has set forth that the doctrines of Kapila, {{Kasyapa|Kaśyapa}}, Buddha, Jina and {{Pasupati|Paśupati}}, who oppose the Author's own accepted doctrine, are unnatural217 because they conflict with Revelation and logic. Now, in order to remove the suspicion that the {{Pancarãtra|Pāñcarātra}} Tantras (which are his own accepted {{doctine|doctrine}}) are equally unnatural with the other doctrines because their usual enumeration on an equal plane with the others has made them closely associated with them in people's thinking, he elicits their validity. In the first two {{sutras|sūtras}} the prima-facie case is laid down: the {{Pancarãtra|Pāñcarātra}} likewise has no validity, {{ulpallyasambhavat|utpattyasaṃbhavāt}}, i.e., on account of the impossibility of {{Sarıkarṣaṇa's|Saṅkarṣaṇa's}} origination which is taught there. Why should it be impossible? Because it cannot be established in either of two possible cases; either the four {{has|vyūhas}} are equally sovereign, or else one God exists in four persons; and in either case there is impossibility of origination. If they are equally sovereign, they cannot be created because they are equal; if only one being is admitted no origination is possible either, since a distribution within one being of creating and created parts is inconceivable.

217: In {{BrS|BṛS}}., 2,2\.  
218: {{asamañjasya|āsamañjasya}}, taken from {{BrS|BṛS}}., 2\.2\.37\.  

[[84]]

100\. Similarly na ca {{kartuḥ karanam|kartuḥ karaṇam}}: {{Pañcarātra|Pāñcarātra}} has no validity for the further reason that it is impossible that the instrument, sc. the mind called Pradyumna, originates from the agent, sc. the individual soul called {{Samkarsana|Saṅkarṣaṇa}}, for the hatchet does not originate from Devadatta. Or there is this alternative explanation of na ca {{kartuḥ karanam|kartuḥ karaṇam}}: and for the further reason that the instrument does not originate from the agent {{Samkarsana|Saṅkarṣaṇa}}, since according to the text: "From it spring the vital air, the mind and all the senses," it is revealed that all instruments really originate from Brahman.

101\. Then follows: {{vijñānādibhāre va tadapratisedhali|vijñānādibhāve vā tadapratiṣedhaḥ}}. By the particle ca this prima-facie case is now reversed. What has been said, viz., that there is no validity since in neither case origination of {{Sankarṣaṇa|Saṅkarṣaṇa}} etc. is possible, is untrue: it is not contradictory that {{Samkarṣaṇa|Saṅkarṣaṇa}} etc. have originated. Indeed, it would be contradictory if they were not {{oijnanadi|vijñānādi}}. Vijñānādi is a dvandva compound: "knowledge and beginning," that means: Brahman; thus {{mijnānādibhāve|vijñānādibhāve}} means {{brahmabhave|brahmabhāve}}. Inasmuch as they are Brahman ({{brahmabhave|brahmabhāve}}), the origination is not contradictory. That is to say by virtue of the fact that the unique Supreme Soul Vāsudeva, whose omnipotence is unbounded, enters into them through His māyā, a cause-effect relation is justified. The objection that the mind cannot originate from {{Samkarsana|Saṅkarṣaṇa}}, on the authority of the śruti that the mind originates from Brahman, is invalidated by the fact that he, sc. {{Samkarsana|Saṅkarṣaṇa}} is {{vijānadi|vijñānādi}}, i.e., Brahman.

[[85]]

102\. Furthermore, what is being said in the argument na ca {{kartuḥ karanam|kartuḥ karaṇam}}? Is it that the instrument of a certain action does not originate from the agent of that same action; or that no instrument of any action whatever originates from any agent whatsoever? If the first view is taken, we have a conflict with Inference, because the argument contains the fallacy of proving the proved. The mind, originating from the agent {{Samkarsana|Saṅkarṣaṇa}} cannot be the instrument of {{Samkarsana's|Saṅkarṣaṇa's}} action of originating it, since it itself is the object of the action; nor can it be the instrument of the action of being originated, since it itself is the agent of that action. If the alternative view is taken, we have a conflict with Perception, because we see that for instance a pitcher, though it be the instrument of an action of fetching water, yet originates from the agent of such an action, the potter. This the Author says in the {{sutra|sūtra}} {{vibratiṣedhat|vipratiṣedhāt}}: 'because there is conflict.'

[[86]] AGAMA PRAMANYAN

103\. As to the other explanation that has been given of these two {{sutras|sūtras}},219 since it is {{vijanadi|vijñānādi}}, i.c. "a ground for validity",220 the denial of the validity of Pāñcarātra is not justified, because it entails overextension. The invalidity, which is defined by the non-origination of knowledge through repetition or dubiety in the Tantras, is rejected, because knowledge is actually had from them. In order to remove the suspicion of untruth occasioned by the speaker's character, the word {{adi|ādi}} is used to convey the intended meaning that the Tantras are in fact spoken by a trustworthy person. Consequently the meaning is this: He always has direct knowledge of the entire world by virtue of the omniscience which is part of His nature; He bestows man's wishes upon him, when He is satisfied—and he is satisfied by meditation alone; Him the experts in the Veda describe as eternally satisfied in all His desires: how then can there be defects in Him like error, deceit etc.?

219: supra §§96, 97\.  
220: i.e., as a {{fat purusa|tatpuruṣa}} compound "the beginning (source) of (valid) knowledge:" {{aijāānddibkor|vijñānādibhāvāt}} "since He (God) is a source of valid knowledge."  

104\. The 'impossibility of origination,' which has been stated in the first two {{sutras|sūtras}}, is thereupon denied for {{Samkarsana|Saṅkarṣaṇa}} and the other forms of God in the {{sutra|sūtra}} {{vipratisedhat|vipratiṣedhāt}}. This means either; "Because there is conflict with the {{Bhagavan's|Bhagavān's}} perception which is inferred through Pañcaratra;" or "Because there is conflict with {{Sruti|Śruti}} which is inferred from the same Tradition."

[[87]]

105\. Or there is another interpretation: since the {{sutras|sūtras}} intend to illustrate the rules of exegesis, the author first assumes that there is a conflict between Śruti and Pañcaratra, though in fact there is no such conflict, and then reasons this out as follows: suppose that Pañcaratra is in conflict with the veda, is this {{sastra|śāstra}} then, like the statements of Manu etc., valid or invalid? This question is thereupon answered: "It is invalid, because of the impossibility of the origination of valid knowledge concerning a conflicting sense; and this impossibility itself is proved on the ground that there is independence of something that is dependent." Thus the {{sutra|sūtra}} {{utpallyasambhavat|utpattyasaṃbhavāt}} means: "because it is impossible that a valid knowledge originates, since, as long as the dependent Pañcaratra Tradition does not start proving the validity of its own sense by establishing the validity of its basis, the cognition which originates from the independent {{preterpersonal|pre-personal}} scripture determines the Tradition's sense as being different, and consequently conflicting with itself. For Pāñcarātra conveys that scripture is its basis only as long as the sword of direct scripture does not cut its root.

106\. OBJECTION. But why should the Vedas themselves be independent, since their validity, too, depends on the direct cognition of the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}}, because this cognition is their cause?221 Just as the Pāñcarātra Traditions are dependent on His cognition, so are the Vedas too dependent on His cognition.222

221: cf. supra § 18\.  
222: {{Karmani Lyu! Papini|Karmaṇi Lyuṭ Pāṇini}}.  

[[88]]

{{RITUTATION|REFUTATION}}. To refute this view, the statement is made: na ca kartuḥ karaṇam: "The Vedas are not the product of a maker, i.e. the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}}. {{Karana|Karaṇa}} here in the sense of "things that are made or produced," by the rule "suffix-{{aia|lyuṭ}} in the sense of the object of the action." This then means that the Vedas are {{preterhuman|pre-personal}}.

107\. {{Vijñānādibhrive vai tadapratised halt|Vijñānādibhāve vai tadapratiṣedhaḥ}}. If, on the other hand, it is not true that the {{Pañcaratra Sastra|Pāñcarātra Śāstra}} is invalid, then what? {{tadapratised hali|tadapratiṣedhaḥ}}, i e. non-rejection of the origination of valid knowledge (namely, even when partly conflicting, the conflicting statement may be valid optionally), because it is based upon the direct cognition of the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}} in whom error and deceit are impossible as He is a source of vijñāna (vijñānādibhāve): Vijñāna means "knowledge par excellence in which no mistake is possible. For since all other authors of {{Dharmasastras|Dharmaśāstras}} are not omniscient, as they are involved in {{samsara|saṃsāra}}, and since therefore they are also not entirely selfsufficient, various lapses are {{con ceivable|conceivable}} in their knowledge. Whereas in the case of the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}}, whose supremacy is natural and unlimited, His knowledge is the immediate insight in all dharma and adharma, which is natural to Him and true, as is known from hundreds of śrutis; it is this knowledge which in the {{sutra|sūtra}} is described as vijñāna, When such knowledge is the 'beginning,' i.e. the basis, there is non-rejection, sc. the {{Sastra|Śāstra}} is valid.

## …

In the statement: "He must let the offering cake stand for over ten nāḍikās,” the injunction is laid down that when the proffered flowers, cake etc. in general have been taken off as nirmālya, because they have now fulfilled their ritual function, they must be kept by way of accessory pūjā rite for a period of ten {{nādikas|nāḍikās}}. And consequently even a study of the conclusions of your own Tantras shows that the touching etc. of the turmeric powder, the food offerings and the water used to clean the idol's feet is not established by Tantric doctrine. Now, where are you!
REFUTATION. Where are you, loquacious debaters, witless fools who have been swallowed by your own tongue which plays around with a grain of knowledge! Your objection looks black and white at once, like the moon with its spots. This prohibition applies only to fools like you, since all this is indeed to be observed by {{Vaisnavas|Vaiṣṇavas}} who are qualified to do so, and thus it is capable of wiping off a multitude of sins in the same way as the drinking of soma at a Vedic sacrifice; for it is not to be touched by others, just as the puroḍaśa cake is not to be touched by dogs! Thus in the {{Isvara Sanhita|Īśvara Saṃhitā}}, "It is difficult to find in this world a true votary of the lord, my son, and, among those who are, it is even more difficult to find a disposition which is truly pure enough for the footwater, or to use the garlands etc. which have been mentioned in the doctrine, Therefore, O six-faced One, all this which is purified by the formulae and the glance of the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}} is forbidden to those who lack this disposition and are not votaries." And in another passage: "The saffron, sandal, camphor and oils that have been taken off {{Visnu's|Viṣṇu's}} body are supremely purifying." Likewise in the Padmodbhava: "He who wears the powder that is taken of {{Viṣņu's|Viṣṇu's}} body on his head obtains the fruit of a Horse Sacrifice and glories in {{Visnu's|Viṣṇu's}} heaven." Similarly in the {{Isvara Samhitā|Īśvara Saṃhitā}}, "No blame should be put by statements arising from ignorance on all that is used, the perfume, flowers etc., (the water) of the idol's bath etc., and the curds, milk etc. Those who condemn this divine purifying agent because they consider it nirmālya, those witless detractors of its power will go to hell." The above statements which to the consecrated prohibit the use of nirmālya at the time mentioned in the time instruction must be understood to mean a time subsequent to that when the (offerings to) the chief of the {{Bhagavan's|Bhagavān's}} retinue281 is being used. Since the garlands, sandal etc, which are offered up to the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}}, later on, after the {{Viśvakşena|Viśvaksena}} offering, become unfit to eat, therefore the Sātvatas use the nivedya etc. before that time. Consequently the use of the nirmālya is a cause of excellence for the Sātvatas.

281: {{Visvaksena|Viśvaksena}}, to whom pūjā is performed after the main pūjā.  

[[115]]
[[116]]
[[117]]
[[118]]

136\. Moreover, it is our postulation that the exemplary people hold the nirmālya of other gods in contempt; this is postulated like the drinking of soma (which is good) because it is Vedic (in contrast to the drinking of liquor which is evil). So I have said that those who do not accept the validity of the {{Bhagavan's|Bhagavān's}} doctrine are unable to determine what is nirmālya. When it is properly determined (namely according to the {{Bhagavans|Bhagavān's}} doctrine) the {{Bhagavan's|Bhagavān's}} nirmālya proves to be extremely purifying, as is demonstrated by the statements of all Vedic teachers. In a matter for which the only means of knowledge is verbal testimony, it must be so as verbal testimony says that it is. Unless one is deaf, one cannot say that there is no verbal testimony concerning it. For instance it is said in the {{Brahma Purina|Brahma Purāṇa}}: "The {{nicedia|nivedya}} of {{Visnu|Viṣṇu}} is declared by the sages to be pure and fit for consumption; one who eats other nirmālya and {{nicedja|nivedya}} must perform the {{candrayana|cāndrāyaṇa}} in expiation. The {{malya|mālya}} which is taken from the body of {{Visņu|Viṣṇu}} takes away evil and is holy. He who wears {{iton|it on}} his head goes to supreme bliss." It follows that the smṛti statement that a man who eats {{nirmalja|nirmālya}} and nivedya must perform the {{candranos|cāndrāyaṇa}}282 should be taken to bear upon the nirmālya of Rudra, {{Kali|Kālī}} etc. {{Thusin|Thus in}} the {{Mahabharata|Mahābhārata}}: "Meditating in one's heart upon Hari, one must offer food to Him with full attention, thereupon pick up this food again with the middlefinger and the thumb, and then sacrifice it bit by bit, saying: "{{Prāṇāya svāhā, Apānāyasvāhā, Vyānāya svāhā, Udanaya svālā, Samānāya svāhā|Prāṇāya svāhā, Apānāya svāhā, Vyānāya svāhā, Udānāya svāhā, Samānāya svāhā}}." Likewise in another passage, "what has been offered to the god must be given to a {{brahmacarin|brahmacārin}}." Thus in the {{Mahabharata|Mahābhārata}}: "The saintly knowers of the Pañcaratra ate in his house that which had been left over by the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}}, as a means to attain to bliss, as supreme nourishment." And likewise the blessed {{Saunaka|Śaunaka}}: "He himself eats the nivedya." He who condemns {{Visnu's|Viṣṇu's}} nivedya, whose purity is proved by hundreds of similar {{smrtis|smṛtis}} and which dispels the fear of rebirth, really ignores the statements of the smṛti because of his heterodoxy and ought to have his tongue cut off.

282: {{Mahabharata|Mahābhārata}} quotations not verifiable.  
[[119]]

137\. OBJECTION. But how can the nivedya be a means for the prāṇāgnihotra?283 The exemplary people do not approve of a means for homa etc. for which no building bricks are used. Nor can a substitution of another substance do duty as a homa, because he lives off food that has been obtained according to taste. Nor can a substitution of another consumption be made to replace the nivedya, for scripture enjoins upon the twiceborn a meal in the evening and a meal in the morning, as follows from the prohibition: "One should not take food in between."
REFUTATION. That is no defect, since the multitude of {{deitics|deities}}, like {{prana|prāṇa}} etc. are revealed to be parts of {{Visnu|Viṣṇu}}, in the same way as Viśvaksena, the chief of {{Visnu's|Viṣṇu's}} retinue. For just as the flowers, cake etc., though proffered to the {{Bhagavan|Bhagavān}} but actually given to Viśvaksena shows that He is familiar under various guises, or just as at a sacrifice the soma juice that is left over by the {{hotar|hotṛ}} is pure to the adhvaryu, so it is also with the nirmālya.284 Moreover, only scripture can be our criterion for what is to be eaten and what is not to be eaten. When it says that something is fit to be eaten, what injunction are we to invent ourselves? Just as the same rule governs both the periodical and the desiderative agnihotra, so the same rule governing the eating of the nivedya applies also to the {{praṇāgnihotra|prāṇāgnihotra}}.

283: The ritual taking of food is considered a performance of the {{praṇignihotra|prāṇāgnihotra}}.  
284: The {{hotar|hotṛ}} is the principal reciting priest at the soma sacrifice, the adhvaryu the main executive.  

[[120]]

## ...

139\. May {{Nathamunis|Nāthamuni}}285 be victorious, he to whom the Three Principles are immediately evident by virtue of his own miraculous power, he by whose pupils the arrogance of the rivals of the {{Satvata|Sātvata}} Doctrine is terminated after their own view was rent to pieces by variously apposite arguments, he whose spirit is for ever the abode of the feet of Mukunda. May, for the length of this Aeon, play on the pious, enchanting and irreproachable sayings of the extensive collection of prose and verse compositions which eclipse the cleverness of the befuddled, conceited and witless assembly of the evil crowd of the rivals of the {{Satvata|Sātvata}} doctrine, whose spirit has been increased by the glorious {{Nathamunindra|Nāthamunīndra}},286 and by which all the unholy powers are cleansed,

285: Predecessor of {{Yamuna|Yāmuna}} at {{Sriranga|Śrīraṅga}}.  
286: {{Nathamuni|Nāthamuni}} compiled the sayings of the {{Vaisnava|Vaiṣṇava}} saints, the {{Alvārs|Āḻvārs}}.  

[[122]]



