+++
title = "2 RAMANUJACHARI"
+++
The works of Yamuna are of special importance to students of vedanta not only because they are the earliest available visistadvaita classics, but also because they present an authentic account of this system of thought and belief, having been inspired and shaped by the rich contributions of previous acharyas including Nathamuni transmitted to him through an unbroken tradition. Agamaprāmāṇyam is one of the most important among his writings; and, strangely enough, there has been till now no critical edition of the text. In this context, my esteemed friend, Dr. van Buitenen has rendered invaluable service by bringing out a critical edition of this masterpiece with a scholarly introduction and English translation, eminently readable and faithful to the original. This timely publication has achieved a twofold purpose, that of giving the text, fast becoming scarce, further lease of life, and of making the thought imbedded in this treatise available even to those unacquainted with Sanskrit. An orientalist of great repute, he has made the field of vedanta, especially visistadvaita vedanta, his own. Already he has earned the gratitude of all interested in our cultural heritage by his excellent publications, such as Ramanuja's Vedarıhasamgraha and Ramanuja on Bhagavat Gita. A warm welcome awaits this excellent publication.

Yamuna, more properly known as Alavandar, occupies a central place among the illustrious visistaiii iv dvaita acharyas who, reformed and revivified this ancient system of thought and belief. Nathamuni set visistadvaita vedanta on a new and glorious phase of its career; Yamuna strengthened it considerably by his writings; and Ramanuja systematised and fortified it. Kuresa pays reverential homage to the illustrious hierarchy of acharyas commencing from Laksminatha (Supreme God, the Consort of Laksmi) and ending with his own preceptor, Ramanuja, with Sage Natha and Yamuna at the centre : Laksmīnātha samārambhām Näthayāmuna madhyamām ! asmadācārya paryantām vande guruparamparām | The grandson and spiritual successor of Nathamuni, Yamuna had the unique privilege of inheriting his grandsire's immeasurable spiritual wealth' and of passing on that legacy to Ramanuja, having enriched it by his own invaluable contributions. At an early age, he achieved great distinction and fame for his erudition and dialectical skill. He easily defeated a court poet, Akkialvan, who was a terror to all learned men, far and near; and, in recognition of this victory he was hailed as Alavandar (Man come to save, rule) and granted the gift of a territory. He ruled over this principality and led a life of pomp and luxury, forgetting the high traditions of his grandfather, until he was won over to the higher life, thanks to the great efforts of Ramamisra, the chosen disciple of PundariI ...stoṣyāmi nah kuladhanam kuladaivatam tat Pādāravindamaravinda vilocanasya tl Stotraratna, St. 6 kākṣa who was himself the foremost among the disciples of Nathamuni, charged with the duty of instructing his grandson in the sacred lore. When the awakening came, Yamuna realised the futility of the life he had been leading, became a sannyasin, settled down at the holy spot of Srirangam, the great centre of Vaisnava thought and devoted the rest of his life to disseminating the truths handed to him by Ramamisra and writing treatises and in unremitting and onepointed devotion to the Lord.

In his exposition of visistadvaitic thought, Yamuna follows the lead of the ancient masters like Bodhayana, Tanka and Dramida and Nathamuni, whose masterpiece, Nyayatattva greatly influenced his own writings. He follows in the foot-steps of Nathamuni so closely that Vedanta Desika describes Atmasiddhi of Yamuna as a brief version of Nyayatattva. (Nyayatativa prakaranam hi Atmasiddhi.) Though steeped in tradition, he was no blind follower. The following stanza shows how he insisted on high standards of thought and discussion: Hanta! brahmopadeśosyam śraddadhānesu śobhate | vayamaśraddadhānāh smo ye yuktim prārthayāmahe || Samvitsiddhi, p. 191 "Well, all this dogmatic teaching may carry conviction with (blind) believers; we are lacking in such faith, and we search for logical reasons to convince us, 11 vi Endowed with a sharp intellect and piercing logic, he could easily see through sophistry, and was averse to using crooked ways of thinking (nirasta jimhaga sparée, Tetirajasaftati, St. 8). He presented his views with precision and clarity and in a manner that would compel astent. A sparkling sense of humour is discernible in his discourses. To cite one illustration while refuting the doctrine of absolute identity based on the upanisadie text-ekam evādvitiyam BrahmaYamuna says in his Samritsiddhi: "The statement 'the permanent ruler of the Cola country now reigning is without a second in this world' is intended to deny the existence of a ruler equal to him. It does not deny the existence of servants, sons, consort, and so on.” The learned editor designates Yamuna as a "temple priest" (vide infra, p. 6) and includes Ramanuja in the class of “theologians and officiating priests” (Vedārthasamgraha, p. 33) and suggests that the inspiration came to them from religion and theology. The appelations 'temple priest' and 'theologian', taken literally, do not imply any derision, and may not be inappropriate designations of these eminent thinkers and ardent devotees who considered service to God and god-lovers as the supreme goal of life; but 'temple priest' is suggestive of one making a living by temple service, one who cares merely for outward, formal routine of worship. Likewise, 'theologian' has veiled association with dogmatic, uncritical acceptance of beliefs. This suspicion gets somewhat strengthened when we read the learned editor saying "What Pancaratra signifies for him (Yamuna) is dîkşâ and the other sacraments; ārādhana and the various aspects of the ritual of vii worship of the God; puja..." In point of fact, they were not temple priests, but eminent sannyasins and accredited leaders and exponents of visistadvaitic thought and vaiṣnava religion, who set great store by logic and sought convincing evidence before accepting any belief It is therefore necessary to consider if these are fair and factual descriptions.

In his learned introduction Dr. van Buitenen refers to a number of problems that challenge attention and call for further study. One of these is 'the reticence of the illustrious vaiṣnava philosopher, Ramanuja, about the Pancaratra system. "Ramanuja remains" he says, "wholly silent about the element, both of doctrine and of religious practice of Pancaratra." In his earlier publication, Ramanuja's Vedarthasamgraha, Dr. van van Buitenen says, that although the orthodoxy of the Pancaratra had been established, "it is not utilised as a source of knowledge in its own right to corroborate Ramanuja's system of vedanta, " There is reference again to "Ramanuja's evident indifference towards Pancaratra. ” He has himself suggested a plausible reason for Ramanuja's not quoting even a single pada from the veritable ocean of the Pancaratra. A master of dialectics, to win support for his interpretation of vedic teachings, form vedantins of all shades of opinion, he would take his stand only on śruti and universally accepted smrti; he would not like to jeopardise a good case by quoting from what may be dubbed sectarian. For an indentical reason, he studiously avoided all reference to the Divyaprabandha, though it has been one of the shaping forces of his thought.viil As regards Ramanuja remaining "wholly silent about the elements both of doctrine and of religious practice of the Pancaratra," it may be said that he presented a synthetic account of vedanta incorporating into it the vedic, agamic and prabandha contributions. The genealogy of the specific items was not indicated because most of them are found in all the scriptures. Ramanuja looked upon the varied scriptures as setting forth identical doctrines, though their language and idiom vary.

It is certainly not difficult to identify the agamic elements in Ramanuja's teaching. In the first place, the prapatti doctrine, though ancient and based on the Upanisads and the Bhagavat Gita, gets special elaboration in the Pancaratra. The credit for having stressed its importance as a self-sufficient and independent means to mokṣa and of explaining its angas (steps) goes to the Pancaratra. As this path is accessible to all irrespective of caste or rank, it has a universal appeal. That everyone, whatever his station in life, is entitled to mokṣa, and that it may be attained in this very birth is a characteristic Pancaratra teaching. Ramanuja utilised this doctrine and incorporated this in his exposition of the visiștadvaita. Though he makes a passing mention of it in the Sri Bhasya and the Vedarthasamgraha, he emphasises it in the Gita Bhasya especially in commenting on the Carama sloka. More than all, in his Gadyatraya which is a confession of his faith, he presents saranagati as hita par excellence.

Another feature of the Pancaratra which Ramanuja has utilised is its insistence on an austere life. In ix Nityagrantha it is prescribed as part of the daily routine throughout life. The day is divided into five periods, each to be devoted to an appropriate duty. The first is abhigamana, when one is to approach God as soon as daily ablutions and pujā are over. The second is called upādāna, a period to be spent în in carning a livelihood in legitimate and appropriate ways. Then follows ijya (literally, sacrifices), referring not to vedic sacrifices but to pancamahā yagna, which include among others, noonday prayer, offering unto God the food prepared and even partaking of meal, which is regarded as a religious act. What pleases the Lord is not the sacrifice which entails much material and effort, but sincere, unselfish and devout approach. True worship is something inward, involving mental purity, earnestness and steadfast faith. Next comes the path of svadhyāya or study. It is a duty cast on every householder to study our sacred lore and to teach the same to others (pravacana) where possible. The concluding part of the day is devoted to quiet concentration (yoga). One is to retire to bed with thoughts of God uppermost in one's mind. Without bisecting life into the sacred and the secular and thereby making either valueless, the Pancaratra invests all our acts with sanctity. Everything that man does, eating and sleeping not excepted, are worship of the Divine. In a word, man's life is to be a God-centred life, all day long and all through life. Life should be characterised by this pervasive note, Yet another fruitful idea which Ramanuja selects from the Pancaratra for elaboration is the concept of disinterested action. Action performed without IL X thought of personal gain and in the spirit of dedication to God leads progressively to self-knowledge, selfrealisation and knowledge of God, which leads to meditation on God and flowers into live of, and surrender to God and final beatitude. "Satvikatyāga pūrvaka karma yogyena karmana ” is a typical Pancaratra formula. In the Gita Bhasya Ramanuja explains the full implications of this concept while commenting on St. 15, Ch. IV of the Bhagavat Gita. "Such a person sees non-action in action; and action in non-action. He is the man of wisdom, worthily engaged; and he is the performer of all actions." Yamuna composed eight works, and they are: Atma-siddhi, Isvara-siddhi, Samvit-siddhi, Gitarthasamgraha, Purusanirnaya, Stotraratna, Catussloki and Agamapramanya. The first three are usually referred to by the collective name, Siddhitraya. A good part of each of these three siddhis has been lost due to neglect and the ravages of time; but even the little that remains gives us a clear idea of the author's views on important philosophical problems and of the masterly way in which he expounds them. Ramanuja quotes profusely from these splendid manuals in his Sri Bhasya.

Gitarthasamgraha is a marvel of epitomising effort. The inspiration for this undertaking came from Ramamisra who initiated Yamuna into the inmost secret of the Bhagavad Gita. In thirty-two stanzas, it sums up the teaching of the Lord's Song as understood by the school which he represented and indicates how the teaching is developed logically and step by step and how the Gitasastra is a consistent xi exposition of the doctrine that it is only through bhakti (loving devotion) brought on by karma and jnana (svadharma jnana vairagya sädhya bhaktyaka gocarah) that the Lord could be reached. This work served as a ground-plan, as it were, for Ramanuja's luminous exposition of the Gita.

Purusanirnaya is designed to show the supremacy of Lord Visnu. The book is not extant now.

Stotraratna AND CATUSSLOKI Stotra-ratna and Catussloki are hymns in praise of Lord Visnu and Goddess Lakshmi respectively. They are held in high esteem as portraying the author's fervent religious feelings and inmost longing for Divine communion and as expounding in an easily intelligible form the central philosophical doctrines of Visiștadvaita regarding tattva (God, man and nature), hita (the way) and puruşartha (the nature of the supreme goal). poem, as Vedanta Desika says, is the spontaneous overflow of the author's ecstatic religious experiences brought on by constant meditation on Divya Prabandha, especially the Tiruvoimozhi of Saint Satakopa. To him the Alwar was father, mother, consort, children, wealth, in a word, everything.

Mātāpita yuvatayah tanaya vibhuti This sarvam yadeva niyamena matanvayānām | ädhyasya nah kulapateh vakulā-bbiramam srimad tadanghri yugalam pranamāmi mūrdhnā || Stotraratna, St. 6 One could see that the stotra is replete with the ideas culled from Tiruvoimozhi; and some of the stanzas seem to be Sanskrit renderings of the Tamil xii hymns. The key-note of the stotra is that prapatti is the only effective means of attaining transcendental felicity. Vedanta Desika has written a commentary bringing out the treasures imbedded in it; and he wrote a brochure on one of its stanzas under the heading Anjalivaibhava. Ramanuja felt moved as he heard Stotraratna recited; and he got there from the cue for his Vaikuntagadya.

CATUSSLOKI Catussloki is an exceedingly brief poem singing the glories of Goddess Lakshmi. The four stanzas comprising it attribute to Sri the qualities of the Lord elaborately set forth in the four chapters of the Brahimasutras. The first stanza refers to the vibhutis of Goddess Lakshmi and shows that they are beyond praise; the second states that Her greatness is incomprehensible even to Her omniscient Consort, even as He cannot comprehend His own greatness; the third speaks of the saving power of Her grace; and the last describes how Her resplendent forms are inseparable from, and co-existent with, those of the Lord.

ĀGAMAPRĀMĀṆYAM Agama pramanya is devoted to vindicating the authority of the Pancaratra tantras. The extensive Pancaratra works called agamas or tantras or samhitas and also Bhagavat Sastra, for the reason that Sriman Narayana is believed to have promulgated them Himself, have always been considered canonical; but detractors have not been wanting, who challenged their authority. Hence Yamuna felt the need for this xiii defence of the Pancaratra. The main adversaries against whom he had to contend are the Mimāmsakas of the Bhatta and the Prabhākara school, the Advaitins and the Naiyayikas. From their respective standpoints they directed their attacks on the Pancaratra tantras. With the aid of reason and scripture, Yamuna meets this many-pronged attack and establishes that the tantras are authoritative. In Agamapramanya, more A than in Siddhitraya, we see Yamuna at his best. master dialectician, he exposes the fallacies in the arguments of his rivals and demonstrates the correctness of his own views, with a wealth of incontrovertible evidence. In the course of the discussion, Yamuna indicates his views on a wide range of problems including those of linguistics, psychology, epistemology and exegesis.

Yamuna discusses at length the proper interpretation that is to be put on the Utpatyadhikarana of the Brahmasutra, as this section has been taken by Sankara to be a refutation of the Pancaratra. With surprising unanimity all commentators have taken Brahmasutra II-ii, 39– 22 as dealing with the Pancaratra although there is no word or expression directly or remotely specifying this theme. They differ however, in their interpretation of these aphorisms. Sankara interprets the four sutras as adducing four reasons for rejecting the Pancaratra; but Yamuna takes the first two as stating the prima facie case against it, and the last two as establishing conclusively the validity of the Pancaratra after exposing the hollowness of the prima facie view. The location of this adhikarana in a pada devoted to the refutation of rival systems, namely, those xiv of Kapila, Kanada, Sangaba, (Arhata) and Pasupata, which are either outside the pale of, or opposed to veda seems to lend support to Sankara's view that the Sutrakara meant to reject the Pancaratra along with the others. Against this view, it is mentioned that with the rejection of the Pasupata agama the impression may be created that the Pancaratra also is devoid of authority; to allay this apprehension the Sutrakara specifically raises the question of the Pancaratra to clinch the argument, Sankara's interpretation of the sutras :— (i) utpattyasambhavat: "On account of the impossibility of origination (the system that subscribes to the view that soul originates, i.e. the Pancaratra is unacceptable)." "There occurs in the Pancaratra the statement, "From Vasudeva there originates the Jiva known as Sankarṣana; ...' "This is an instance where ,the Pancaratra is opposed to the vedic teaching that the soul is neither born, nor does it die. Hence it is to be rejected.

(ii) na ca kartuh karanam: "Besides, the instrument cannot originate from the agent (hence the Pancaratra which accepts such a doctrine is to be discarded)”. There is the Pancaratra statement ... from the individual soul called Sankarṣana manas, known as, Pradyumna originates; from Pradyumna originates Ahamkāra known as Aniruddha." The Jiva who is an agent engages in his activity only with the aid of manas; when that is so, how can the Jiva be said to give rise to manas? Moreover, the vedas declare that manas and the like proceed from Brahman alone. Hence the Pancaratra is to be rejected.

XV K (iii) vijnānādibhāve rā tadapraṣedhah: "Should it be said that they are only Brahman, the objection, namely, impossibility of origination is not got over." That is, even if it be said that Sankarṣana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are not Jiva, manas and Ahankara respectively, but really Brahman, since they are all alike Brahman there cannot be the causal rela. tion among them; no one of them could give rise to the next in the series. It is everywhere observed that the cause and its effect differ from each other in some of their characteristics.

(iv) vipratiṣedhat: "And because of contradiction (the Pancaratra lacks authority)." As the Pancaratra is self-discrepant and as it contradicts the vedic teachings, it is liable to be rejected. For example, the Pancaratra maintains that jnana is at once guna and guni. Bhagavan is of the essence of jnana for His attribute. Further, the Pancaratra denounces the veda. It is well-known, Sandilya declares, that failing to find the highest felicity in the veda, he learnt the Pancaratra and attained thereby what he could not get from the veda. Hence the Pancaratra contradicts itself and speaks disparagingly of the veda, it is to be rejected.

Yamuna's interpretation: Yamuna, and, following his lead, Ramanuja, argue that this adhikarana establishes precisely the opposite conclusion, namely, the validity of the Pancaratra. While there is substantial agreement between Sankara and Yamuna in their interpretation of the first two sutras, Yamuna takes the third and the fourth sutras as meeting the objections xvi that may be urged against the Pancaratra. The expression va occurring in the third sutra is indicative of a change in the direction of the argument, as in many an instance where this expression occurs.

(iii) Vijnānābhāve va tadapratiṣedhah:"Or if they are of the nature of jnāna and cause, i.e., Brahman, the authority of the Pancaratra is unassailed, i.e., there can be no valid objection to the Pancaratra." Either the Vyūhas (Vasudeva, Sankarṣana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha) are independent sovereigns or they are the four-fold forms, chosen out of His own free-will by the Supreme Lord out of compassion for purposes of protecting the world. The first alternative is ruled out, as the Pancaratra does not admit of a plurality of God, but is an uncompromising monotheism. On the other alternative of a single Deity in fourfold forms, the question of origination does not arise. Sankarṣana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are really the highest Brahman; they are not jivas, manas and ahamkara respectively. If they are so called, it is because they control these factors from within. Thus, in truth the Pancaratra does not, as it is alleged, countenance the view that the soul has an origin. Whoever says it does advocate the non-vedic doctrine of the origination of the soul is really ignorant of the Pancaratra teaching, (iv) Vipratiṣdhāt : "Morcover, on account of contradiction (the authority of the Pancaratra cannot be assailed)." The Pancaratra agamas actually deny origination to the soul and assert its eternity. Thus the objections raised against them are not tenable. The allegation that xvii there is denunciation of the veda, is baseless, because the statement is not to be construed as meaning that the veda is no guide to transcendental felicity, but only as signifying the inability of Sandilya to ascertain the profound truths of veda and the Pancaratra helping him to comprehend easily the vedic teachings. Far from belittling the veda, it proclaims the greatness of Bhagavat Sastra and suggests that while the veda and the agamas contain an identical teaching, the latter arc easier of comprehension.

Yamuna presents quite a number of alternative interpretations of the third and fourth sutras, all alike strengthening the conviction that the authority of the Pancaratra cannot be gainsaid.

It passes one's understanding how Badarayana (Vyasa) foremost among those proficient in the veda who loudly proclaimed the glories of the Bhagavat Sastra in his Mahabharata could be taken as having denied it any authority in his Brahmasutra the most authentic exposition of vedantic teachings.

Thus with unparalleled dialectical skill and with a wealth of convincing arguments Yamuna turns the table against his opponents and establishes conclusively the orthodoxy of the Pancaratra.

R RAMANUJACHARI

